The Life and Science of Richard Feynman

Genius

James Gleick

For my mother and father,

Beth and Donen

I was born not knowing
and have only had a little time to change that here and there.

—Richard Feynman

CONTENTS

PROLOGUE

FAR ROCKAWAY

•Neither Country nor City •A Birth and a Death •It’s Worth It •At
School •All Things Are Made of Atoms •A Century of Progress
•Richard and Julian

MIT

• The Best Path • Socializing the Engineer • The Newest Physics
• Shop Men • Feynman of Course Is Jewish • Forces in Molecules •
Is He Good Enough?

PRINCETON

• A Quaint Ceremonious Village • Folds and Rhythms • Forward
or Backward? • The Reasonable Man • Mr. X and the Nature of
Time • Least Action in Quantum Mechanics • The Aura • The White
Plague • Preparing for War • The Manhattan Project • Finishing Up

LOS ALAMOS

• The Man Comes In with His Briefcase • Chain Reactions • The
Battleship and the Mosquito Boat • Diffusion • Computing by Brain •
Computing by Machine • Fenced In • The Last Springtime • False
Hopes • Nuclear Fear • I Will Bide My Time • We Scientists Are
Clever

CORNELL

• The University at Peace • Phenomena Complex—Laws Simple
• They All Seem Ashes • Around a Mental Block • Shrinking the

Infinities • Dyson • A Half-Assedly Thought-Out Pictorial SemiVision Thing • Schwinger’s Glory • My Machines Came from Too
Far Away • There Was Also Presented (by Feynman) … • CrossCountry with Freeman Dyson • Oppenheimer’s Surrender • Dyson
Graphs, Feynman Diagrams • Away to a Fabulous Land

CALTECH

• Faker from Copacabana • Alas, the Love of Women! • Onward
with Physics • A Quantum Liquid • New Particles, New Language •
Murray • In Search of Genius • Weak Interactions • Toward a
Domestic Life • From QED to Genetics • Ghosts and Worms • Room
at the Bottom • All His Knowledge • The Explorers and the Tourists •
The Swedish Prize • Quarks and Partons • Teaching the Young • Do
You Think You Can Last On Forever? • Surely You’re Joking! • A
Disaster of Technology

EPILOGUE

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

NOTES

A FEYNMAN BIBLIOGRAPHY

BIBLIOGRAPHY

INDEX

ILLUSTRATION CREDITS

PROLOGUE

Nothing is certain. This hopeful message went to an Albuquerque
sanatorium from the secret world at Los Alamos. We lead a charmed life.
Afterward demons afflicted the bomb makers. J. Robert Oppenheimer
made speeches about his shadowed soul, and other physicists began to
feel his uneasiness at having handed humanity the power of selfdestruction. Richard Feynman, younger and not so responsible, suffered a
more private grief. He felt he possessed knowledge that set him alone and
apart. It gnawed at him that ordinary people were living their ordinary lives
oblivious to the nuclear doom that science had prepared for them. Why
build roads and bridges meant to last a century? If only they knew what he
knew, they surely would not bother. The war was over, a new era of science
was beginning, and he was not at ease. For a while he could hardly work—
by day a boyish and excitable professor at Cornell University, by night wild
in love, veering from freshman mixers (where women sidled away from this
rubber-legged dancer claiming to be a scientist who had made the atomic
bomb) to bars and brothels. Meanwhile new colleagues, young physicists
and mathematicians of his own age, were seeing him for the first time and
forming their quick impressions. “Half genius and half buffoon,” Freeman
Dyson, himself a rising prodigy, wrote his parents back in England.
Feynman struck him as uproariously American—unbuttoned and burning
with physical energy. It took him a while to realize how obsessively his new
friend was tunneling into the very bedrock of modern science.

In the spring of 1948, still in the shadow of the bomb they had made,
twenty-seven physicists assembled at a resort hotel in the Pocono
Mountains of northern Pennsylvania 
their
understanding of the atom. With Oppenheimer’s help (he was now more
than ever their spiritual leader) they had scraped together the thousandodd dollars needed to cover their rooms and train fare, along with a small
outlay for liquor. In the annals of science it was the last time but one that
such men would meet in such circumstances, without ceremony or
publicity. They were indulging a fantasy, that their work could remain a

to confront a crisis 

in 

small, personal, academic enterprise, invisible to most of the public, as it
had been a decade before, when a modest building in Copenhagen
served as the hub of their science. They were not yet conscious of how
effectively they had persuaded the public and the military to make physics
a mission of high technology and expense. This meeting was closed to all
but the few invited participants, the elite of physics. No transcript was kept.
Next year most of these men would meet once more, hauling their two
blackboards and eighty-two cocktail and brandy glasses in Oppenheimer’s
station wagon, but by then the modern era of physics had begun in earnest,
science conducted on a scale the world had not seen, and never again
would its chiefs come together privately, just to work.

The bomb had shown the aptness of physics. The scientists had found
enough sinew behind their penciled abstractions to change history. Yet in
the cooler days after the war’s end, they realized how fragile their theory
was. They thought that quantum mechanics gave a crude, perhaps
temporary, but at least workable way to make calculations about light and
matter. When pressed, however, the theory gave wrong results. And not
merely wrong—they were senseless. Who could love a theory that worked
so neatly at first approximation and then, when a scientist tried to make the
results more exact, broke down so grotesquely? The Europeans who had
invented quantum physics had tried everything they could imagine to shore
up the theory, without success.

How were these men to know anything? The mass of the electron? Up
for grabs: a quick glance gave a reasonable number, a hard look gave
infinity—nonsense. The very idea of mass was unsettled: mass was not
exactly stuff, but not exactly energy, either. Feynman toyed with an extreme
view. On the last page of his tiny olive-green dime-store address book,
mostly for phone numbers of women (annotated dancer beauty or call
when her nose is not red), he scrawled a near haiku.

Principles

You can’t say A is made of B
or vice versa.
All mass is interaction.

Even when quantum physics worked, in the sense of predicting nature’s

behavior, it left scientists with an uncomfortable blank space where their
picture of reality was supposed to be. Some of them, though never
Feynman, put their faith in Werner Heisenberg’s wistful dictum, “The
equation knows best.” They had little choice. These scientists did not even
know how to visualize the atom they had just split so successfully. They had
created and then discarded one sort of picture, a picture of tiny particles
orbiting a central nucleus as planets orbit the sun. Now they had nothing to
replace it. They could write numbers and symbols on their pads, but their
mental picture of the substance beneath the symbols had been reduced to
a fuzzy unknown.

As the Pocono meeting began, Oppenheimer had reached the peak of
his public glory, having risen as hero of the atomic bomb project and not
yet having fallen as the antihero of the 1950s security trials. He was the
meeting’s nominal chairman, but more accomplished physicists were
scattered about the room: Niels Bohr, the father of the quantum theory, on
hand from his institute in Denmark; Enrico Fermi, creator of the nuclear
chain reaction, from his laboratory in Chicago; Paul A. M. Dirac, the British
theorist whose famous equation for the electron had helped set the stage
for the present crisis. It went without saying that they were Nobel laureates;
apart from Oppenheimer almost everyone in the room either had won or
would win this honor. A few Europeans were absent, as was Albert
Einstein, settling into his statesmanlike retirement, but with these
exceptions the Pocono conclave represented the whole priesthood of
modern physics.

Night fell and Feynman spoke. Chairs shifted. The priesthood had
trouble following this brash young man. They had spent most of the day
listening to an extraordinary virtuoso presentation by Feynman’s exact
contemporary, Julian Schwinger of Harvard University. This had been
difficult to follow (when published, Schwinger’s work would violate the
Physical Review’s guidelines limiting the sprawl of equations across the
width of the page) but convincing nonetheless. Feynman was offering
fewer and less meticulous equations. These men knew him from Los
Alamos, for better and for worse. Oppenheimer himself had privately noted
that Feynman was the most brilliant young physicist at the atomic bomb
project. Why he had acquired such a reputation none of them could say
precisely. A few knew of his contribution to the key equation for the

efficiency of a nuclear explosion (still classified forty years later, although
the spy Klaus Fuchs had transmitted it promptly to his incredulous masters
in the Soviet Union) or his theory of predetonation, measuring the
probability that a lump of uranium might explode too soon. If they could not
describe his actual scientific work, nevertheless they had absorbed an
intense image of an original mind. They remembered him organizing the
world’s first large-scale computing system, a hybrid of new electromechanical business calculators and teams of women with color-coded
cards; or delivering a hypnotic lecture on, of all things, elementary
arithmetic; or frenetically twisting a control knob in a game whose object
was to crash together a pair of electric trains; or sitting defiantly upright, for
once motionless, in an army weapons carrier lighted by the purple-white
glare of the century’s paradigmatic explosion.

Facing his elders in the Pocono Manor sitting room, Feynman realized
that he was drifting deeper and deeper into confusion. Uncharacteristically,
he was nervous. He had not been able to sleep. He, too, had heard
Schwinger’s elegant lecture and feared that his own presentation seemed
unfinished by comparison. He was trying to put across a new program for
making the more exact calculations that physics now required—more than
a program, a vision, a dancing, shaking picture of particles, symbols,
arrows, and fields. The ideas were unfamiliar, and his slightly reckless style
irritated some of the Europeans. His vowels were a raucous urban growl.
His consonants slurred in a way that struck them as lower-class. He shifted
his weight back and forth and twirled a piece of chalk rapidly between his
fingers, around and around and end over end. He was a few weeks shy of
his thirtieth birthday, too old now to pass for a boy wonder. He was trying to
skip some details that would seem controversial—but too late. Edward
Teller, the contentious Hungarian physicist, on his way to heading the
postwar project to build the Super, the hydrogen bomb, interrupted with a
question about basic quantum physics: “What about the exclusion
principle?”

Feynman had hoped to avoid this. The exclusion principle meant that
only one electron could inhabit a particular quantum state; Teller thought he
had caught him pulling two rabbits from a single hat. Indeed, in Feynman’s
scheme particles did seem to violate this cherished principle by coming
into existence for a ghostly instant. “It doesn’t make any difference—” he

started to reply.

“How do you know?
“I know, I worked from a—”
“How could it be!” Teller said.
Feynman was drawing unfamiliar diagrams on the blackboard. He
showed a particle of antimatter going backward in time. This mystified
Dirac, the man who had first predicted the existence of antimatter. Dirac
now asked a question about causality: “Is it unitary?” Unitary! What on
earth did he mean?

“I’ll explain it to you,” Feynman said, “and then you can see how it works,
then you can tell me if it’s unitary.” He went on, and from time to time he
thought he could still hear Dirac muttering, “Is it unitary?”

Feynman—mystifyingly brilliant at calculating, strangely ignorant of the
literature, passionate about physics, reckless about proof—had for once
overestimated his ability to charm and persuade these great physicists.
Yet in truth he had now found what had eluded all of his elders, a way to
carry physics forward into a new era. He had created a private new
science that brought past and future together in a starkly majestic tapestry.
His new friend Dyson at Cornell had glimpsed it—“this wonderful vision of
the world as a woven texture of world lines in space and time, with
everything moving freely,” as Dyson described it. “It was a unifying principle
that would either explain everything or explain nothing.” Twentieth-century
physics had reached an edge. Older men were looking for a way beyond
an obstacle to their calculations. Feynman’s listeners were eager for the
new ideas of young physicists, but they were wedded to a certain view of
the atomic world—or rather, a series of different views, each freighted with
private confusion. Some were thinking mostly about waves—mathematical
waves carrying the past into the present. Often, of course, the waves
behaved as particles, like the particles whose trajectories Feynman
sketched and erased on the blackboard. Some merely took refuge in the
mathematics, chains of difficult calculations using symbols as stepping
stones on a march through fog. Their systems of equations represented a
submicroscopic world defying the logic of everyday objects like baseballs
and water waves, ordinary objects with, “thank God,” as W. H. Auden put it
(in a poem Feynman detested):

sufficient mass
To be altogether there,
Not an indeterminate gruel
Which is partly somewhere else.

The objects of quantum mechanics were always partly somewhere else.
The chicken-wire diagrams that Feynman had etched on the blackboard
seemed, by contrast, quite definite. Those trajectories looked classical in
their precision. Niels Bohr stood up. He knew this young physicist from Los
Alamos—Feynman had argued freely and vehemently with Bohr. Bohr had
sought Feynman’s private counsel there, valuing his frankness, but now he
was disturbed by the evident implications of those crisp lines. Feynman’s
particles seemed to be following paths neatly fixed in space and time. This
they could not do. The uncertainty principle said so.

“Already we know that the classical idea of the trajectory in a path is not
a legitimate idea in quantum mechanics,” he said, or so Feynman thought
—Bohr’s soft voice and notoriously vague Danish tones kept his listeners
straining to understand. He stepped forward and for many minutes, with
Feynman standing unhappily to the side, delivered a humiliating lecture on
the uncertainty principle. Afterward Feynman kept his despair to himself. At
Pocono a generation of physics was melting into the next, and the passing
of generations was neither as clean nor as inevitable as it later seemed.

Architect of quantum theories, brash young group leader on the atomic
bomb project, inventor of the ubiquitous Feynman diagram, ebullient bongo
player and storyteller, Richard Phillips Feynman was the most brilliant,
iconoclastic, and influential physicist of modern times. He took the halfmade conceptions of waves and particles in the 1940s and shaped them
into tools that ordinary physicists could use and understand. He had a
lightning ability to see into the heart of the problems nature posed. Within
the community of physicists, an organized, tradition-bound culture that
needs heroes as much as it sometimes mistrusts them, his name took on
a special luster. It was permitted in connection with Feynman to use the
word genius. He took center stage and remained there for forty years,
dominating the science of the postwar era—forty years that turned the
study of matter and energy down an unexpectedly dark and spectral road.

The work that made its faltering appearance at Pocono tied together in an
experimentally perfect package all the varied phenomena at work in light,
radio, magnetism, and electricity. It won Feynman a Nobel Prize. At least
three of his later achievements might also have done so: a theory of
superfluidity, the strange, frictionless behavior of liquid helium; a theory of
weak interactions, the force at work in radioactive decay; and a theory of
partons, hypothetical hard particles inside the atom’s nucleus, that helped
produce the modern understanding of quarks. His vision of particle
interaction kept returning to the forefront of physics as younger scientists
explored esoteric new domains. He continued to find new puzzles. He
could not, or would not, distinguish between the prestigious problems of
elementary particle physics and 
the apparently humbler everyday
questions that seemed to belong to an earlier era. No other physicist since
Einstein so ecumenically accepted the challenge of all nature’s riddles.
Feynman studied friction on highly polished surfaces, hoping—and mostly
failing—to understand how friction worked. He tried to make a theory of
how wind makes ocean waves grow; as he said later, “We put our foot in a
swamp and we pulled it up muddy.” He explored the connection between
the forces of atoms and the elastic properties of the crystals they form. He
assembled experimental data and theoretical ideas on the folding of strips
of paper into peculiar shapes called flexagons. He made influential
progress—but not enough to satisfy himself—on the quantum theory of
gravitation that had eluded Einstein. He struggled for years, in vain, to
penetrate the problem of turbulence in gases and liquids.

Feynman developed a stature among physicists that transcended any
raw sum of his actual contributions to the field. Even in his twenties, when
his published work amounted to no more than a doctoral thesis (profoundly
original but little understood) and a few secret papers in the Los Alamos
archives, his legend was growing. He was a master calculator: in a group
of scientists he could create a dramatic impression by slashing his way
through a difficult problem. Thus scientists—believing themselves to be
unforgiving meritocrats—found quick opportunities to compare themselves
unfavorably to Feynman. His mystique might have belonged to a gladiator
or a champion arm-wrestler. His personality, unencumbered by dignity or
decorum, seemed to announce: Here is an unconventional mind. The
English writer C. P. Snow, observing the community of physicists, thought

Feynman lacked the “gravitas” of his seniors. “A little bizarre … He would
grin at himself if guilty of stately behaviour. He is a showman and enjoys it
… rather as though Groucho Marx was suddenly standing in for a great
scientist.” It made Snow think of Einstein, now so shaded and dignified that
few remembered the “merry boy” he had been in his creative time.
Perhaps Feynman, too, would grow into a stately personage. Perhaps not.
Snow predicted, “It will be interesting for young men to meet Feynman in
his later years.”

One team of physicists, assembled for the Manhattan Project, met him
for the first time in Chicago, where he solved a problem that had baffled
them for a month. It was “a shallow way to judge a superb mind,” one of
them admitted later, but they had to be impressed, by the unprofessorial
manner as much as the feat itself: “Feynman was patently not struck in the
prewar mold of most young academics. He had the flowing, expressive
postures of a dancer, the quick speech we thought of as Broadway, the pat
phrases of the hustler and the conversational energy of a finger snapper.”
Physicists quickly got to know his bounding theatrical style, his way of
bobbing sidelong from one foot to the other when he lectured. They knew
that he could never sit still for long and that when he did sit he would slouch
comically before leaping up with a sharp question. To Europeans like Bohr
his voice was as American as any they had heard, a sort of musical
sandpaper; to the Americans it was raw, unregenerate New York. No
matter. “We got the indelible impression of a star,” another young physicist
noted. “He may have emitted light as well as words… . Isn’t areté the
Greek word for that shining quality? He had it.”

Originality was his obsession. He had to create from first principles—a
dangerous virtue that sometimes led to waste and failure. He had the cast
of mind that often produces cranks and misfits: a willingness, even
eagerness, to consider silly ideas and plunge down wrong alleys. This
strength could have been a crippling weakness had it not been redeemed,
time and again, by a powerful intelligence. “Dick could get away with a lot
because he was so goddamn smart,” a theorist said. “He really could
climb Mont Blanc barefoot.” Isaac Newton spoke of having stood on the
shoulders of giants. Feynman tried to stand on his own, through various
acts of contortion, or so it seemed to the mathematician Mark Kac, who
was watching Feynman at Cornell:

There are two kinds of geniuses, the “ordinary” and the
“magicians.” An ordinary genius is a fellow that you and I would be just
as good as, if we were only many times better. There is no mystery as
to how his mind works. Once we understand what they have done, we
feel certain that we, too, could have done it. It is different with the
magicians. They are, to use mathematical jargon, in the orthogonal
complement of where we are and the working of their minds is for all
intents and purposes incomprehensible. Even after we understand
what they have done, the process by which they have done it is
completely dark. They seldom, if ever, have students because they
cannot be emulated and it must be terribly frustrating for a brilliant
young mind to cope with the mysterious ways in which the magician’s
mind works. Richard Feynman is a magician of the highest caliber.

Feynman resented the polished myths of most scientific history,
submerging the false steps and halting uncertainties under a surface of
orderly intellectual progress, but he created a myth of his own. When he
had ascended to the top of the physicists’ mental pantheon of heroes,
stories of his genius and his adventures became a sort of art form within
the community. Feynman stories were clever and comic. They gradually
created a legend from which their subject (and chief purveyor) seldom
emerged. Many of them were transcribed and published in the eighties in
two books with idiosyncratic titles, Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman!
and What Do You Care What Other People Think? To the surprise of
their publisher these became popular best-sellers. After his death in 1988
his sometime friend, collaborator, office neighbor, foil, competitor, and
antagonist, the acerbic Murray Gell-Mann, angered his family at a
memorial service by asserting, “He surrounded himself with a cloud of
myth, and he spent a great deal of time and energy generating anecdotes
about himself.” These were stories, Gell-Mann added, “in which he had to
come out, if possible, looking smarter than anyone else.” In these stories
Feynman was a gadfly, a rake, a clown, and a naïf. At the atomic bomb
project he was the thorn in the side of the military censors. On the
commission investigating the 1986 space-shuttle explosion he was the
outsider who pushed aside red tape to uncover the true cause. He was the

enemy of pomp, convention, quackery, and hypocrisy. He was the boy who
saw the emperor with no clothes. So he was in life. Yet Gell-Mann spoke
the truth, too. Amid the legend were misconceptions about Feynman’s
accomplishments, his working style, and his deepest beliefs. His own view
of himself worked less to illuminate than to hide the nature of his genius.

The reputation, apart from the person, became an edifice standing
monumentally amid the rest of the scenery of modern science. Feynman
diagrams, Feynman integrals, and Feynman rules joined Feynman stories
in the language that physicists share. They would say of a promising young
colleague, “He’s no Feynman, but …” When he entered a room where
physicists had gathered—the student cafeteria at the California Institute of
Technology, or the auditorium at any scientific meeting—with him would
come a shift in the noise level, a disturbance of the field, that seemed to
radiate from where he was carrying his tray or taking his front-row seat.
Even his senior colleagues tried to look without looking. Younger physicists
were drawn to Feynman’s rough glamour. They practiced imitating his
handwriting and his manner of throwing equations onto the blackboard.
One group held a half-serious debate on the question, Is Feynman human?
They envied the inspiration that came (so it seemed to them) in flashes.
They admired him for other qualities as well: a faith in nature’s simple
truths, a skepticism about official wisdom, and an impatience with
mediocrity.

He was widely considered a great educator. In fact few physicists of
even the middle ranks left behind so small a cadre of students, or so
assiduously shirked ordinary teaching duties. Although science remained
one of the few domains of true apprenticeship, with students learning their
craft at the master’s side, few learned this way from Feynman. He did not
have the patience to guide a student through a research problem, and he
raised high barriers against students who sought him as a thesis adviser.
Nevertheless when Feynman did teach he left a deep imprint on the
subject. Although he never actually wrote a book, books bearing his name
began to appear in the sixties—Theory of Fundamental Processes and
Quantum Electrodynamics, lightly edited versions of lectures transcribed
by students and colleagues. They became influential. For years he offered
a mysterious noncredit course called Physics X, for undergraduates only,
in a small basement room. Some physicists years later remembered this

intense 

the most 

free-form seminar as 

unpredictable 
intellectual
experience of their education. Above all in 1961 he took on the task of
reorganizing and teaching the introductory physics course at Caltech. For
two years the freshmen and sophomores, along with a team of graduatestudent teaching assistants, struggled to follow a tour de force, the
universe according to Feynman. The result was published and became
famous as “the red books”—The Feynman Lectures on Physics. They
reconceived the subject from the bottom up. Colleges that adopted the red
books dropped them a few years later: the texts proved too difficult for their
intended readers. Instead, professors and working physicists found
Feynman’s three volumes reshaping their own conception of their subject.
They were more than just authoritative. A physicist, citing one of many
celebrated passages, would dryly pay homage to “Book II, Chapter 41,
Verse 6.”

Authoritative, too, were Feynman’s views of quantum mechanics, of the
scientific method, of the relations between science and religion, of the role
of beauty and uncertainty in the creation of knowledge. His comments on
such subjects were mostly expressed offhand in technical contexts, but
also in two slim models of science writing, again distilled from lectures:
The Character of Physical Law and QED: The Strange Theory of Light
and Matter. Feynman was widely quoted by scientists and science writers
(although he seldom submitted to interviews). He despised philosophy as
soft and unverifiable. Philosophers “are always on the outside making
stupid remarks,” he said, and the word he pronounced philozawfigal was a
mocking epithet, but his influence was philosophical anyway, particularly
for younger physicists. They remembered, for example, his Gertrude
Stein–like utterance on the continuing nervousness about quantum
mechanics—or, more precisely, the “world view that quantum mechanics
represents”:

It has not yet become obvious to me that there’s no real problem. I
cannot define the real problem, therefore I suspect there’s no real
problem, but I’m not sure there’s no real problem.

or, similarly, what may have been the literature’s most quoted mixed
metaphor:

Do not keep saying to yourself, if you can possibly avoid it, “But
how can it be like that?” because you will get “down the drain,” into a
blind alley from which nobody has yet escaped. Nobody knows how it
can be like that.

In private, with pencil on scratch paper, he labored over aphorisms that he
later delivered in spontaneous-seeming lectures:

Nature uses only the longest threads to weave her patterns, so
each small piece of her fabric reveals the organization of the entire
tapestry.

Why is the world the way it is? Why is science the way it is? How do we
discover new rules for the flowering complexity around us? Are we
reaching toward nature’s simple heart, or are we merely peeling away
layers of an infinitely deep onion? Although he sometimes retreated to a
stance of pure practicality, Feynman gave answers to these questions,
philosophical and unscientific though he knew they were. Few noticed, but
his answer to the starkest of science’s metaphysical questions—Is there a
meaning, a simplicity, a comprehensibility at the core of things?—
underwent a profound change in his lifetime.

Feynman’s reinvention of quantum mechanics did not so much explain
how the world was, or why it was that way, as tell how to confront the world.
It was not knowledge of or knowledge about. It was knowledge how to.
How to compute the emission of light from an excited atom. How to judge
experimental data, how to make predictions, how to construct new tool kits
for the new families of particles that were about to proliferate through
physics with embarrassing fecundity.

There were other kinds of scientific knowledge, but pragmatic
knowledge was Feynman’s specialty. For him knowledge did not describe;
it acted and accomplished. Unlike many of his colleagues, educated
scientists in a cultivated European tradition, Feynman did not look at
paintings, did not listen to music, did not read books, even scientific
books. He refused to let other scientists explain anything to him in detail,
often to their immense frustration. He learned anyway. He pursued
knowledge without prejudice. During a sabbatical he learned enough

trying 

biology to make a small but genuine contribution to geneticists’
understanding of mutations in DNA. He once offered (and then awarded) a
one-thousand-dollar prize for the first working electric motor less than one
sixty-fourth of an inch long, and his musing on the possibilities of tiny
machinery made him, a generation later, the intellectual father of a legion
of self-described nanotechnologists. In his youth he experimented for
months on end with 
to observe his unraveling stream of
consciousness at the point of falling asleep. In his middle age he
experimented with inducing out-of-body hallucinations in a sensorydeprivation tank, with and without marijuana. His 
lifetime saw a
stratification of the branch of knowledge called physics. Those specializing
in the understanding of elementary particles came to control much of the
field’s financing and much of its public rhetoric. With the claim that particle
they scorned even
physics was 
subdisciplines like solid-state physics—“squalid-state” was Gell-Mann’s
contemptuous phrase. Feynman embraced neither the inflating language
of Grand Unified Theories nor the disdain for other sciences.

fundamental science, 

the most 

Democratically, as if he favored no skill above any other, he taught
himself how to play drums, to give massages, to tell stories, to pick up
women in bars, considering all these to be crafts with learnable rules. With
the gleeful prodding of his Los Alamos mentor Hans Bethe (“Don’t you
know how to take squares of numbers near 50?”) he taught himself the
tricks of mental arithmetic, having long since mastered the more arcane
arts of mental differentiation and integration. He taught himself how to
make electroplated metal stick to plastic objects like radio knobs, how to
keep track of time in his head, and how to make columns of ants march to
his bidding. He had no difficulty learning to make an impromptu xylophone
by filling water glasses; nor had he any shyness about playing them, all
evening, at a dinner party for an astonished Niels Bohr. At the same time,
when he was engrossed in the physicists’ ultimate how-to endeavor, the
making of an atomic bomb, he digressed to learn how to defeat the iron
clamp of an old-fashioned soda machine, how to pick Yale locks, and then
how to open safes—a mental, not physical, skill, though his colleagues
mistakenly supposed he could feel the vibrations of falling tumblers in his
fingertips (as well they might, after watching him practice his twirling
motion day after day on their office strongboxes). Meanwhile, dreamily

wondering how to harness atomic power for rockets, he worked out a
nuclear reactor thrust motor, not quite practical but still plausible enough to
be seized by the government, patented, and immediately buried under an
official secrecy order. With no less diligence, much later, having settled
into a domestic existence complete with garden and porch, he taught
himself how to train dogs to do counterintuitive tricks—for example, to pick
up a nearby sock not by the direct route but by the long way round, circling
through the garden, in the porch door and back out again. (He did the
training in stages, breaking the problem down until after a while it was
perfectly obvious to the dog that one did not go directly to the sock.) Then
he taught himself how to find people bloodhound-style, sensing the track of
their body warmth and scent. He taught himself how to mimic foreign
languages, mostly a matter of confidence, he found, combined with a
relaxed willingness to let lips and tongue make silly sounds. (Why then, his
friends wondered, could he never learn to soften his Far Rockaway
accent?) He made islands of practical knowledge in the oceans of
personal ignorance that remained: knowing nothing about drawing, he
taught himself to make perfect freehand circles on the blackboard;
knowing nothing about music, he bet his girlfriend that he could teach
himself to play one piece, “The Flight of the Bumblebee,” and for once
failed dismally; much later he learned to draw after all, after a fashion,
specializing in sweetly romanticized female nudes and letting his friends
know that a concomitant learned skill thrilled him even more—how to
persuade a young woman to disrobe. In his entire life he could never quite
teach himself to feel a difference between right and left, but his mother
finally pointed out a mole on the back of his left hand, and even as an adult
he checked the mole when he wanted to be sure. He taught himself how to
hold a crowd with his not-jazz, not-ethnic improvisational drumming; and
how to sustain a two-handed polyrhythm of not just the usual three against
two and four against three but—astonishing to classically trained
musicians—seven against six and thirteen against twelve. He taught
himself how to write Chinese, a skill acquired specifically to annoy his
sister and limited therefore to the characters for “elder brother also
speaks.” In the era when high-energy particle accelerators came to
dominate theoretical physics, he taught himself how to read the most
modern of hieroglyphics, the lacy starburst photographs of particle

collisions in cloud chambers and bubble chambers—how to read them not
for new particles but for the subtler traces of experimental bias and selfdeception. He taught himself how to discourage autograph seekers and
refuse lecture invitations; how to hide from colleagues with administrative
requests; how to force everything from his field of vision except for his
research problem of the moment; how to hold off the special terrors of
aging that shadow scientists; then how to live with cancer, and how to
surrender to it.

After he died several colleagues tried to write his epitaph. One was
Schwinger, in a certain time not just his colleague but his preeminent rival,
who chose these words: “An honest man, the outstanding intuitionist of our
age, and a prime example of what may lie in store for anyone who dares to
follow the beat of a different drum.” The science he helped create was like
nothing that had come before. It rose as his culture’s most powerful
achievement, even as it sometimes sent physicists down the narrowing
branches of an increasingly obscure tunnel. When Feynman was gone, he
had left behind—perhaps his chief legacy—a lesson in what it meant to
know something in this most uncertain of centuries.

FAR ROCKAWAY

Eventually the art went out of radio tinkering. Children forgot the pleasures
of opening the cabinets and eviscerating their parents’ old Kadettes and
Clubs. Solid electronic blocks replaced the radio set’s messy innards—so
where once you could learn by tugging at soldered wires and staring into
the orange glow of the vacuum tubes, eventually nothing remained but
featureless ready-made chips, the old circuits compressed a thousandfold
or more. The transistor, a microscopic quirk in a sliver of silicon,
supplanted the reliably breakable tube, and so the world lost a well-used
path into science.

In the 1920s, a generation before the coming of solid-state electronics,
one could look at the circuits and see how the electron stream flowed.
Radios had valves, as though electricity were a fluid to be diverted by
plumbing. With the click of the knob came a significant hiss and hum, just
at the edge of audibility. Later it was said that physicists could be divided
into two groups, those who had played with chemistry sets and those who
had played with radios. Chemistry sets had their appeal, but a boy like
Richard Feynman, loving diagrams and maps, could see that the radio
was its own map, a diagram of itself. Its parts expressed their function,
once he learned to break the code of wires, resistors, crystals, and
capacitors. He assembled a crystal set, attached oversized earphones
from a rummage sale, and listened under the bedcovers until he fell
asleep. Sometimes his parents would tiptoe in and take the earphones off
their sleeping boy. When atmospheric conditions were right, his radio
could pull in signals from far away—Schenectady in upstate New York or
even station WACO from Waco, Texas. The mechanism responded to the
touch. To change channels he slid a contact across a wire coil. Still, the
radio was not like a watch, with gears and wheels. It was already one step
removed from the mechanical world. Its essential magic was invisible after
all. The crystal, motionless, captured waves of electromagnetic radiation
from the ether.

Yet there was no ether—no substance bearing these waves. If scientists

wished to imagine radio waves propagating with the unmistakable
undulating rhythm of waves in a pond, they nonetheless had to face the fact
that these waves were not in anything. Not in the era of relativity: Einstein
was showing that if an ether existed it would have to be motionless with
respect to any and all observers—though they themselves moved in
different directions. This was impossible. “It seems that the aether has
betaken itself to the land of the shades in a final effort to elude the
inquisitive search of the physicist!” the mathematician Hermann Weyl
wrote in 1918, the year Feynman was born. Through what medium, then,
were radio waves sweeping in their brief journey from the aerials of
downtown New York to Feynman’s second-story bedroom in a small frame
house on the city’s outskirts? Whatever it was, the radio wave was only
one of the many sorts of oscillations disturbing every region of space.
Waves of light, physically identical to radio waves but many times shorter,
crisscrossing hectically; infrared waves, perceptible as heat on the skin;
the ominously named X rays; the ultra-high-frequency gamma rays, with
wavelengths smaller than atoms—all these were just different guises of
one phenomenon, electromagnetic radiation. Already space was an
electromagnetic babel, and human-built transmitters were making it busier
still. Fragmented voices, accidental clicks, slide-whistle drones: strange
noises passed through one another, more waves in a well-corrugated
waviness. These waves coexisted not in the ether but in a rather more
abstract medium, the precise nature of which was posing difficulties for
physicists. They could not imagine what it was—a problem that was only
mildly allayed by the fact that they had a name for it, the electromagnetic
field, or just the field. The field was merely a continuous surface or volume
across which some quantity varied. It had no substance, yet it shook; it
vibrated. Physicists were discovering that the vibrations sometimes
behaved like particles, but this just complicated the issue. If they were
particles, they were nonetheless particles with an undeniably wavelike
quality that enabled boys like Feynman to tune in to certain desirable
wavelengths, the ones carrying “The Shadow” and “Uncle Don” and
advertisements for Eno Effervescent Salts. The scientific difficulties were
obscure, known only to a handful of scientists more likely to speak German
than English. The essence of the mystery, however, was clear to amateurs
who read about Einstein in the newspapers and pondered the simple

magic of a radio set.

No wonder so many future physicists started as radio tinkerers, and no
wonder, before physicist became a commonplace word, so many of them
grew up thinking they might become electrical engineers, professionals
known to earn a good wage. Richard, called Ritty by his friends, seemed to
be heading single-mindedly in that direction. He accumulated tube sets
and an old storage battery from around the neighborhood. He assembled
transformers, switches, and coils. A coil salvaged from a Ford automobile
made showy sparks that burned brown-black holes in newspaper. When
he found a leftover rheostat, he pushed 110-volt electricity through it until it
overloaded and burned. He held the stinking, smoking thing outside his
second-floor window, as the ashes drifted down to the grassy rear yard.
This was standard emergency procedure. When a pungent odor drifted in
downstairs during his mother’s bridge game, it meant that Ritty was
dangling his metal wastebasket out the window, waiting for the flames to
die out after an abortive experiment with shoe polish—he meant to melt it
and use the liquid as black paint for his “lab,” a wooden crate roughly the
size of a refrigerator, standing in his bedroom upstairs in the rear of the
house. Screwed into the crate were various electrical switches and lights
that Ritty had wired, in series and in parallel. His sister, Joan, nine years
younger, served eagerly as a four-cents-a-week lab assistant. Her duties
included putting a finger into a spark gap and enduring a mild shock for the
entertainment of Ritty’s friends.

It had already occurred to psychologists that children are innate
scientists, probing, puttering, experimenting with the possible and
impossible in a confused local universe. Children and scientists share an
outlook on life. If I do this, what will happen? is both the motto of the child
at play and the defining refrain of the physical scientist. Every child is
observer, analyst, and taxonomist, building a mental life through a
sequence of intellectual revolutions, constructing theories and promptly
shedding them when they no longer fit. The unfamiliar and the strange—
these are the domain of all children and scientists.

None of which could fully account for the presence of laboratory,
rheostat, and lab assistant—tokens of a certain vivid cultural stereotype.
Richard Feynman was relentless in filling his bedroom with the trappings
and systems of organized science.

Neither Country nor City

Charmed lives were led by the children of Far Rockaway, a village that
amounted to a few hundred acres of frame houses and brick apartment
blocks on a spit of beach floating off Long Island’s south shore. The
neighborhood had been agglomerated into the political entity of New York
City as one of the more than sixty towns and neighborhoods that merged
as the borough of Queens in 1898. The city was investing generously in
these neighborhoods, spending tens of millions of dollars on the laying of
water mains, sewers, and roadways and the construction of grand public
buildings. Still, in the first part of the twentieth century, before the IND
subway line reached out across the marshes of Jamaica Bay, the city
seemed a faraway place. Commuters took the Long Island Rail Road.
Beyond Far Rockaway’s eastern border lay the small towns of Nassau
County, Long Island. To the northwest, across marshy tongues of ocean
called Mott Basin and Hassock Channel, lay a flat expanse that later
became Idlewild Airport and then Kennedy International Airport. On foot or
on their bicycles, Far Rockaway’s children had free run of a self-contained
world: ivy-covered houses, fields, and vacant lots. No one has yet isolated
the circumstances that help a child grow whole and independent, but they
were present. At some point in a town’s evolution, houses and fences grow
dense enough to form a connected barrier. When that critical point is
reached, movement is mostly restricted to public streets. In Far Rockaway
boys and girls still percolated through the neighborhood and established
their own paths through backyards and empty lots behind the houses and
streets. They were autonomous and enterprising in play, roaming far from
their parents’ immediate oversight, riding their bicycles without accounting
for their whereabouts. They could wander through fields on the way to the
shore, and then they could rent boats and row them up and down the
protected inlets. Richard walked to the library and, sitting on the stone
steps, watched people go by in all directions. Distant as New York
seemed, he felt bound enough to the great city to look down on the
outsiders living a few blocks away, in Cedarhurst, Long Island. But he also
knew that his neighborhood was a place apart.

“When I was a child I thought we lived at the end of the world,” wrote
another New Yorker, the critic Alfred Kazin; he grew up in Brownsville, a
Brooklyn neighborhood a little poorer and almost as remote, another
district of Jewish immigrants and children of immigrants occupying that
unusual boundary between the urban and the rural. “There were always raw
patches of unused city land all around us filled with ‘monument works’
where they cut and stored tombstones, as there were still on our street
farmhouses and the remains of old cobbled driveways,” he wrote—“most
of it dead land, neither country nor city… . That was the way to the ocean
we always took summer evenings—through silent streets of old broken
houses whose smoky red Victorian fronts looked as if the paint had clotted
like blood and had then been mixed with soot—past infinite weedy lots… .”
For Ritty Feynman the beach was best of all—the long southern strand
stretching almost unbroken to the far east end of Long Island, framed by its
boardwalk and summer hotels, cottages and thousands of private lockers.
Far Rockaway was a summer resort with beach clubs for people from the
city: the Ostend Baths, Roche’s (for a long time Richard thought this was
named after the insect), the Arnold. There were wooden pavilions and
changing rooms for rent by the season, with shiny locks and keys. For the
local children, though, the beach served its purpose the year round. They
splashed in the light surf, attenuated by a long breakwater pale beneath the
waves. At the height of the summer’s crowds the pink and green of bathing
suits dotted the sand like gumdrops. It was his favorite place. He usually
rode his bicycle the four thousand feet from his house (a distance that
expanded in his later memory to two miles). He went with friends or alone.
The sky was larger there than anywhere else in the city’s confines; the
ocean tempted his imagination as it does any child’s. All those waves, all
that space, the boats crawling like apparitions along the horizon toward
New York Harbor, Europe and Africa lying far beyond, at the end of a long
uninterrupted vector curving downward below the sky. It sometimes
seemed that the things near the sea were the only things that were any
good.

The dome of the sky stretched upward. The arcs of the sun and moon
crossed directly ahead, rising and falling with the season. He could splash
his heels in the surf and recognize a line that formed the tripartite boundary
between earth, sea, and air. At night he would take his flashlight. For

teenagers the beach was a site for social mixing between boys and girls;
he did his best, though he sometimes felt gawky. He often swam. When he
was forty-three, setting out nearly everything he knew about physics in the
historic two-year undergraduate course that became The Feynman
Lectures on Physics, he stood before a hall of freshmen and tried to place
them mentally at the beach. “If we stand on the shore and look at the sea,”
he said, “we see the water, the waves breaking, the foam, the sloshing
motion of the water, the sound, the air, the winds and the clouds, the sun
and the blue sky, and light; there is sand and there are rocks of various
hardness and permanence, color and texture. There are animals and
seaweed, hunger and disease, and the observer on the beach; there may
even be happiness and thought.” Nature was elemental there, though for
Feynman elemental did not mean simple or austere. The questions he
considered within the physicist’s purview—the fundamental questions—
arose on the beach. “Is the sand other than the rocks? That is, is the sand
perhaps nothing but a great number of very tiny stones? Is the moon a
great rock? If we understood rocks, would we also understand the sand
and the moon? Is the wind a sloshing of the air analogous to the sloshing
motion of the water in the sea?”

The great European migration to America was ending. For the Jews of
Russia, Eastern Europe, and Germany, for the Irish and the Italians, the
first-hand and first-generation memories would now recede. The outer
neighborhoods of New York flourished in the generations before World
War II and then began to wane. In Far Rockaway not much changed visibly
in the sixty-nine years of Feynman’s lifetime. When Feynman returned on a
visit with his children a few years before his death, everything seemed
shrunken and forlorn, the fields and vacant lots were gone, but it was the
same beach with its boardwalk, the same high school, the same house he
had wired for radio broadcasts—the house now divided, to accommodate
a tenant, and not nearly so spacious as in memory. He did not ring the bell.
The village’s main street, Central Avenue, seemed shabby and narrow.
The population had become largely Orthodox Jewish, and Feynman was
vaguely disturbed to see so many yarmulkes, or, as he actually said, “those
little hats that they wear”—meaning: I don’t care what things are called.
And casually repudiating the culture that hung as thick in the air of his
childhood as the smoke of the city or the salt of the ocean.

The Judaism of Far Rockaway took in a liberal range of styles of belief,
almost broad enough to encompass atheists like Richard’s father, Melville.
It was a mostly Reform Judaism, letting go the absolutist and fundamental
traditions for the sake of a gentle, ethical humanism, well suited for fresh
Americans pinning their hopes on children who might make their way into
the mainstream of the New World. Some households barely honored the
Sabbath. In some, like Feynman’s, Yiddish would have been a foreign
language. The Feynmans belonged to the neighborhood temple. Richard
went to Sunday school for a while and belonged to a Shaaray Tefila youth
group that organized after-school activities. Religion remained part of the
village’s ethical core. Families like the Feynmans, in neighborhoods all
around greater New York City, produced in the first half of the twentieth
century an outpouring of men and women who became successful in many
fields, but especially science. These hundred-odd square miles of the
planet’s surface were disproportionately fertile in the spawning of Nobel
laureates. Many families, as Jews, were embedded in a culture that prized
learning and discourse; immigrants and the children of immigrants worked
to fulfill themselves through their own children, who had to be sharply
conscious of their parents’ hopes and sacrifices. They shared a sense that
science, as a profession, rewarded merit. In fact, the best colleges and
universities continued to raise barriers against Jewish applicants, and their
science faculties remained determinedly Protestant, until after World War
II. Science nevertheless offered the appearance of a level landscape,
where the rules seemed mathematical and clear, free from the hidden
variables of taste and class.

first-generation memories would now 

As a town Far">22"/> to America was ending. For the Jews of Russia,
Eastern Europe, and Germany, for the Irish and the Italians, the first-hand
and 
recede. The outer
neighborhoods of New York flourished in the generations before World
War II and then began to wane. In Far Rockaway not much changed visibly
in the sixty-nine years of Feynman’s lifetime. When Feynman returned on a
visit with his children a few years before his death, everything seemed
shrunken and forlorn, the fields and vacant lots were gone, but it was the
same beach with its boardwalk, the same high school, the same house he
had wired for radio broadcasts—the house now divided, to accommodate
a tenant, and not nearly so spacious as in memory. He did not ring the bell.

The village’s main street, Central Avenue, seemed shabby and narrow.
The population had become largely Orthodox Jewish, and Feynman was
vaguely disturbed to see so many yarmulkes, or, as he actually said, “those
little hats that they wear”—meaning: I don’t care what things are called.
And casually repudiating the culture that hung as thick in the air of his
childhood as the smoke of the city or the salt of the ocean.

The Judaism of Far Rockaway took in a liberal range of styles of belief,
almost broad enough to encompass atheists like Richard’s father, Melville.
It was a mostly Reform Judaism, letting go the absolutist and fundamental
traditions for the sake of a gentle, ethical humanism, well suited for fresh
Americans pinning their hopes on children who might make their way into
the mainstream of the New World. Some households barely honored the
Sabbath. In some, like Feynman’s, Yiddish would have been a foreign
language. The Feynmans belonged to the neighborhood temple. Richard
went to Sunday school for a while and belonged to a Shaaray Tefila youth
group that organized after-school activities. Religion remained part of the
village’s ethical core. Families like the Feynmans, in neighborhoods all
around greater New York City, produced in the first half of the twentieth
century an outpouring of men and women who became successful in many
fields, but especially science. These hundred-odd square miles of the
planet’s surface were disproportionately fertile in the spawning of Nobel
laureates. Many families, as Jews, were embedded in a culture that prized
learning and discourse; immigrants and the children of immigrants worked
to fulfill themselves through their own children, who had to be sharply
conscious of their parents’ hopes and sacrifices. They shared a sense that
science, as a profession, rewarded merit. In fact, the best colleges and
universities continued to raise barriers against Jewish applicants, and their
science faculties remained determinedly Protestant, until after World War
II. Science nevertheless offered the appearance of a level landscape,
where the rules seemed mathematical and clear, free from the hidden
variables of taste and class.

As a town Far Rockaway had a center that even Cedarhurst lacked.
When Richard’s mother, Lucille, walking down to Central Avenue, headed
for stores like Nebenzahl’s and Stark’s, she appreciated the centralization.
She knew her children’s teachers personally, helped get the school
lunchroom painted, and joined her neighbors in collecting the set of red

glassware given out as a promotion by a local movie theater. This village
looked inward as carefully as the shtetl that remained in some memories.
There was a consistency of belief and behavior. To be honest, to be
principled, to study, to save money against hard times—the rules were not
so much taught as assumed. Everyone worked hard. There was no sense
of poverty—certainly not in Feynman’s family, though later he realized that
two families had shared one house because neither could get by alone.
Nor in his friend Leonard Mautner’s, even after the father had died and an
older brother was holding the family together by selling eggs and butter
from house to house. “That was the way the world was,” Feynman said long
afterward. “But now I realize that everybody was struggling like mad.
Everybody was struggling and it didn’t seem like a struggle.” For children,
life in such neighborhoods brought a rare childhood combination of
freedom and moral rigor. It seemed to Feynman that morality was made
easy. He was allowed to surrender to a natural inclination to be honest. It
was the downhill course.

A Birth and a Death

Melville Feynman (he pronounced his surname like the more standard
variants: Fineman or Feinman) came from Minsk, Byelorussia. He
immigrated with his parents, Louis and Anne, in 1895, at the age of five,
and grew up in Patchogue, Long Island. He had a fascination with science
but, like other immigrating Jews of his era, no possible means to fulfill it.
He studied a fringe version of medicine called homeopathy; then he
embarked on a series of businesses, selling uniforms for police officers
and mail carriers, selling an automobile polish called Whiz (for a while the
Feynmans had a garage full of it), trying to open a chain of cleaners, and
finally returning to the uniform business with a company called Wender &
Goldstein. He struggled for much of his business life.

His wife had grown up in better circumstances. Lucille was the daughter
of a successful milliner who had emigrated as a child from Poland to an
English orphanage, where he acquired the name Henry Phillips. From
there Lucille’s father came to the United States, where he got his first job
selling needles and thread from a pack on his back. He met Johanna

Helinsky, a daughter of German-Polish immigrants, when she repaired his
watch in a store on the Lower East Side of New York. Henry and Johanna
not only married but also went into business together. They had an idea
that rationalized the trimming of the elaborate hats that women wore before
World War I, and their millinery business thrived. They moved to a town
house well uptown on the East Side, on 92d Street near Park Avenue, and
there Lucille, the youngest of their five children, was born in 1895.

Like many well-off, assimilating Jews, Lucille Phillips attended the
Ethical Culture School (an institution whose broad humanist ethos soon left
its mark on J. Robert Oppenheimer, nine years her junior). She prepared
to teach kindergarten. Instead, soon after graduating, still a teenager, she
met Melville. The introduction to her future husband came through her best
friend. Melville was the friend’s date; Lucille was invited to accompany a
friend of Melville’s. They went for a drive, with Lucille joining Melville’s
friend sitting in the back seat. On the return trip, it was Lucille and Melville
who sat together.

A few days later he said, “Don’t get married to anybody else.” This was
not quite a proposal, and her father would not allow her to marry Melville
until three years later, when she turned twenty-one. They moved into an
inexpensive apartment in upper Manhattan in 1917, and Richard was born
in a Manhattan hospital the next year.

A later family legend held that Melville announced in advance that, if the
baby was a boy, he would be a scientist. Lucille supposedly replied, Don’t
count your chickens before they hatch. But Richard’s father undertook to
help his prophecy along. Before the baby was out of his high chair, he
brought home some blue and white floor tiles and laid them out in patterns,
blue-white-blue-white or blue-white-white-blue-white-white, trying to coax
the baby to recognize visual rhythms, the shadow of mathematics. Richard
had walked at an early age, but he was two before he talked. His mother
worried for months. Then, as late talkers so often do, Richard became
suddenly and unstoppably voluble. Melville bought the Encyclopaedia
Britannica, and Richard devoured it. Melville took his son on trips to the
American Museum of Natural History, with its animal tableaux in glass
cases and its famous, towering, bone-and-wire dinosaurs. He described
dinosaurs in a way that taught a lesson about expressing dimensions in
human units: “twenty-five feet high and the head is six feet across” meant,

he explained, that “if he stood in our front yard he would be high enough to
put his head through the window but not quite because the head is a little
bit too wide and it would break the window”—a vivid enough illustration for
any small boy.

Melville’s gift to the family was knowledge and seriousness. Humor and
a love of storytelling came from Lucille. At any rate, that was how family
lore tended to apportion their influence. Melville liked to laugh at the stories
his wife and children told, at dinner and afterward, when the family regularly
read aloud. He had a surprising giggle, and his son acquired an eerily
exact facsimile. Comedy, for Lucille, was a high calling and a way of
defying misfortune: the hard reality of her grandparents’ lives in a Polish
ghetto, and tragedy in her own family. Her mother suffered from epilepsy
and her eldest sister from schizophrenia. Except for another sister, Pearl,
her brothers and sisters died young.

Early death also came to her new household. In the winter Richard was
five, she gave birth to a second son, named Henry Phillips Feynman, after
her father, who had died a year before. Four weeks later the baby came
down with a fever. A fingernail had been bleeding and never quite healed.
Within days the baby was dead, probably from spinal meningitis. The grief,
the quick turning of happiness into despair—and surely for Richard the fear
as well—darkened their home for a long time. He had waited for a brother.
Now he had a lesson in human precariousness, in the cruelty of nature’s
untamed accidents. Later he almost never spoke of the harsh death that
dominated this year. He had no brother or sister again until finally, when he
was nine, Joan was born. Henry’s presence remained a shadow in the
household. Richard knew—even Joan knew—that their mother always kept
a birth certificate and a hat that had once belonged to a boy whose
remains now lay in the vault of the family mausoleum five miles away,
behind a stone plate inscribed, “HENRY PHILLIPS FEYNMAN JANUARY 24,
1924–FEBRUARY 25, 1924.”

The Feynmans moved several times, leaving Manhattan for the small
towns straddling the city border: first to Far Rockaway; then from Far
Rockaway to Baldwin, Long Island; then to Cedarhurst, when Richard was
about ten, and then back to Far Rockaway. Lucille’s father owned a house
there, and they moved in—a two-story house of stucco the color of sand,
on a small lot at 14 New Broadway. There were front and rear yards and a

double driveway. They shared the house with Lucille’s sister Pearl and her
family—her husband, Ralph Lewine, a boy, Robert, just older than Richard,
and a girl, Frances, just younger. A rail of white wood ringed the porch. The
ground floor held two living rooms, one for show and one for general use,
with gas logs in a fireplace for cold days. The bedrooms were small, but
there were eight of them. Richard’s, on the second floor, overlooked the
back yard, with its forsythia and peach tree. Some evenings the adults
would come home to find his cousin, Frances, shivering at the upstairs
landing, unable to sleep because Richard, as chief baby-sitter, had told
ghost stories drawing their mood from the old Gothic panels that lined the
stairs.

The household had two other members during those pre-Depression
years, a German immigrant couple, Ludwig and Marie, easing their
passage into the United States by working as household servants for room
and board. Marie cooked; Ludwig said wryly that he was gardener,
chauffeur, and butler, serving meals in a formal white coat. They also
arranged some serious and inventive play. With Ludwig’s help the north
window of the garage became the North Fenster Bank. Everyone took
turns playing teller and customer. As Ludwig and Marie learned English
they taught the children other routines: the protocols of gardening and
formal table manners. If Feynman acquired such skills, he carefully shed
them later.

To Joan, the youngest of all the children, it seemed like a well-run
household where things happened when they were supposed to happen.
Late one night, however, when she was three or four, her brother shook her
awake in violation of the routine. He said he had permission to show her
something rare and wonderful. They walked, holding hands, onto Far
Rockaway’s small golf course, away from the illuminated streets. “Look
up,” Richard said. There, far above them, the streaky wine-green curtains
of the aurora borealis rippled against the sky. One of nature’s surprises.
Somewhere in the upper atmosphere solar particles, focused by the
earth’s magnetosphere, ripped open trails of luminous high-voltage
ionization. It was a sight that the street lights of a growing city would soon
cast out forever.

It’s Worth It

The mathematics and the tinkering developed separately. At home the
scientific inventory expanded to include chemicals from chemistry sets,
lenses from a telescope, and photographic developing equipment. Ritty
wired his laboratory into the electrical circuits of the entire house, so that
he could plug his earphones in anywhere and make impromptu broadcasts
through a portable loudspeaker. His father declared—something he had
heard—that electrochemistry was an important new field, and Ritty tried in
vain to figure out what electrochemistry was: he made piles of dry
chemicals and set live wires in them. A jury-rigged motor rocked his baby
sister’s crib. When his parents came home late one night, they opened the
door to a sudden clang-clang-clang and Ritty’s shout: “It works!” They now
had a burglar alarm. If his mother’s bridge partners asked how she could
tolerate the noise, or the chemical smoke, or the not-so-invisible ink on the
good linen hand towels, she said calmly that it was worth it. There were no
second thoughts in the middle-class Jewish families of New York about the
value of ambition on the children’s behalf.

The Feynmans raised their children according to a silent creed shared
with many of their neighbors. Only rarely did they express its tenets, but
they lived by them. They were sending their children into a world of
hardships and dangers. A parent does all he or she can to bring a child up
“so that he can better face the world and meet the intense competition of
others for existence,” as Melville once put it. The child will have to find a
niche in which he can live a useful and fruitful life. The parents’ motives are
selfish—for nothing can magnify parents in the eyes of their neighbors as
much as the child’s success. “When a child does something good and
unusual,” Melville wrote, “it is the parents chest that swells up and who
looks around and says to his neighbors (without actually speaking, of
course) ‘See what I have wrought? Isn’t he wonderful? What have you got
that can equal what I can show?’ And the neighbors help the ego of the
parent along by acclaiming the wonders of the child and by admiring the
parent for his success …” A life in the business world, “the commercial
world,” is arid and exhausting; turn rather to the professions, the world of
learning and culture. Ultimately, for the sacrifices of his parents a child
owes no debt—or rather the debt is paid to his own children in turn.

The adult Richard Feynman became an adept teller of stories about
himself, and through these stories came a picture of his father as a man
transmitting a set of lessons about science. The lessons were both naïve
and wise. Melville Feynman placed a high value on curiosity and a low
value on outward appearances. He wanted Richard to mistrust jargon and
uniforms; as a salesman, he said, he saw the uniforms empty. The pope
himself was just a man in a uniform. When Melville took his son on walks,
he would turn over stones and tell him about the ants and the worms or the
stars and the waves. He favored process over facts. His desire to explain
such things often outstripped his knowledge of them; much later Feynman
recognized that his father must have invented sometimes. The gift of these
lessons, as Feynman expressed it in his two favorite stories about his
father, was a way of thinking about scientific knowledge.

One was the story about birds. Fathers and sons often walked together
on summer weekends in the Catskill Mountains of New York, and one day
a boy said to Richard, “See that bird? What kind of bird is that?”

I said, “I haven’t the slightest idea what kind of bird it is.”

 He says, “It’s a brown-throated thrush. Your father doesn’t teach you
anything!”
 But it was the opposite. He had already taught me: “See that bird?”
he says. “It’s a Spencer’s warbler.” (I knew he didn’t know the real
name.) “Well, in Italian, it’s a Chutto Lapittida. In Portuguese, it’s a
Bom da Peida. In Chinese, it’s a Chung-long-tah, and in Japanese,
it’s a Katano Tekeda. You can know the name of that bird in all the
languages of the world, but when you’re finished, you’ll know
absolutely nothing whatever about the bird. You’ll only know about
humans in different places and what they call the bird. So let’s look at
the bird and see what it’s doing—that’s what counts.”

The second story also carried a moral about the difference between the
name and the thing named. Richard asks his father why, when he pulls his
red wagon forward, a ball rolls to the back.

“That,” he says, “nobody knows. The general principle is that things
that are moving try to keep on moving, and things that are standing still

tend to stand still, unless you push on them hard.” And he says, “This
tendency is called inertia, but nobody knows why it’s true.” Now that’s
a deep understanding.

Deeper than Melville could have known: few scientists or educators
recognized that even a complete Newtonian understanding of force and
inertia leaves the why unanswered. The universe does not have to be that
way. It is hard enough to explain inertia to a child; to recognize that the ball
actually moves forward slightly with respect to the ground while moving
backward sharply with respect to the wagon; to see the role of friction in
transferring the force; to see that every body perseveres in its state of
being at rest or of moving uniformly straight forward, except insofar as it
is compelled to change its state by forces impressed upon it. It is hard
enough to convey all that without adding an almost scholastically subtle
lesson about the nature of explanation. Newton’s laws do explain why balls
roll to the back of wagons, why baseballs travel in wind-bent parabolas,
and even why crystals pick up radio waves, up to a point. Later Feynman
became acutely conscious of the limits of such explanations. He agonized
over the difficulty of truly explaining how a magnet picks up an iron bar or
how the earth imparts the force called gravity to a projectile. The Feynman
who developed an agnosticism about such concepts as inertia had a
stranger physics in mind as well, the physics being born in Europe while
father and son talked about wagons. Quantum mechanics imposed a new
sort of doubt on science, and Feynman expressed that doubt often, in
many different ways. Do not ask how it can be like that. That, nobody
knows.

Even when he was young, absorbing such wisdom, Feynman
sometimes glimpsed the limits of his father’s understanding of science. As
he was going to bed one night, he asked his father what algebra was.

“It’s a way of doing problems that you can’t do in arithmetic,” his father

said.

“Like what?”
“Like a house and a garage rents for $15,000. How much does the

garage rent for?”

Richard could see the trouble with that. And when he started high school,
he came home upset by the apparent triviality of Algebra 1. He went into

his sister’s room and asked, “Joanie, if 2x is equal to 4 and x is an
unknown number, can you tell me what x is?” Of course she could, and
Richard wanted to know why he should have to learn anything so obvious in
high school. The same year, he could see just as easily what x must be if
2x was 32. The school quickly switched him into Algebra 2, taught by Miss
Moore, a plump woman with an exquisite sense of discipline. Her class ran
as a roundelay of problem solving, the students making a continual stream
to and from the blackboard. Feynman was slightly ill at ease among the
older students, but he already let friends know that he thought he was
smarter. Still, his score on the school IQ test was a merely respectable
125.

At School

The New York City public schools of that era gained a reputation later for
high quality, partly because of the nostalgic reminiscences of famous
alumni. Feynman himself thought that his grammar school, Public School
39, had been stultifyingly barren: “an intellectual desert.” At first he learned
more at home, often from the encyclopedia. Having trained himself in
rudimentary algebra, he once concocted a set of four equations with four
unknowns and showed it off to his arithmetic teacher, along with his
methodical solution. She was impressed but mystified; she had to take it to
the principal to find out whether it was correct. The school had one course
in general science, for boys only, taught by a blustering, heavyset man
called Major Connolly—evidently his World War I rank. All Feynman
remembered from the course was the length of a meter in inches, 39.37,
and a futile argument with the teacher over whether rays of light from a
single source come out radially, as seemed logical to Richard, or in
parallel, as in the conventional textbook diagrams of lens behavior. Even in
grade school he had no doubt that he was right about such things. It was
just obvious, physically—not the sort of argument that could be settled by
an appeal to authority. At home, meanwhile, he boiled water by running
110-volt house current through it and watched the lines of blue and yellow
sparks that flow when the current breaks. His father sometimes described
the beauty of the flow of energy through the everyday world, from sunlight to

plants to muscles to the mechanical work stored in the spring of a windup
toy. Assigned at school to write verse, Richard applied this idea to a
fancifully bucolic scene with a farmer plowing his field to make food, grass,
and hay:

… Energy plays an important part

And it’s used in all this work;
Energy, yes, energy with power so great,
A kind that cannot shirk.

If the farmer had not this energy,
He would be at a loss,
But it’s sad to think, this energy
Belongs to a little brown horse.

Then he wrote another poem, brooding self-consciously about his own
obsession with science and with the idea of science. Amid some
borrowed apocalyptic imagery he expressed a feeling that science meant
skepticism about God—at least about the standardized God to whom he
had been exposed at school. Over the Feynmans’ rational and humanistic
household God had never held much sway. “Science is making us
wonder,” he began—then on second thought he scratched out the word
wonder.

Science is making us wander,

Wander, far and wide;
And know, by this time,
Our face we ought to hide.

Some day, the mountain shall wither,
While the valleys get flooded with fire;
Or men shall be driven like horses,
And stamper, like beasts, in the mire.

And we say, “The earth was thrown from the sun,”
Or, “Evolution made us come to be

And we come from lowest of beasts,
Or one step back, the ape and monkey.”

Our minds are thinking of science,
And science is in our ears;
Our eyes are seeing science,
And science is in our fears.

Yes, we’re wandering from the Lord our God,
Away from the Holy One;
But now we cannot help it,
For it is already done.

But poetry was (Richard thought) “sissy-like.” This was no small problem.
He suffered grievously from the standard curse of boy intellectuals, the fear
of being thought, or of being, a sissy. He thought he was weak and
physically awkward. In baseball he was inept. The sight of a ball rolling
toward him across a street filled him with dread. Piano lessons dismayed
him, too, not just because he played so poorly, but because he kept
playing an exercise called “Dance of the Daisies.” For a while this verged
on obsession. Anxiety would strike when his mother sent him to the store
for “peppermint patties.”

As a natural corollary he was shy about girls. He worried about getting in
fights with stronger boys. He tried to ingratiate himself with them by solving
their school problems or showing how much he knew. He endured the
canonical humiliations: for example, watching helplessly while some
neighborhood children turned his first chemistry set into a brown, useless,
sodden mass on the sidewalk in front of his house. He tried to be a good
boy and then worried, as good boys do, about being too good—“goodygood.” He could hardly retreat from intellect to athleticism, but he could
hold off the taint of sissiness by staying with the more practical side of the
mental world, or so he thought. The practical man—that was how he saw
himself. At Far Rockaway High School he came upon a series of
mathematics primers with that magical phrase in the title—Arithmetic for
the Practical Man; Algebra for the Practical Man—and he devoured them.
He did not want to let himself be too “delicate,” and poetry, literature,

drawing, and music were too delicate. Carpentry and machining were
activities for real men.

For students whose competitive instincts could not be satisfied on the
baseball field, New York’s high schools had the Interscholastic Algebra
League: in other words, math team. In physics club Feynman and his
friends studied the wave motions of light and the odd vortex phenomenon
of smoke rings, and they re-created the already classic experiment of the
California physicist Robert Millikan, using suspended oil drops to measure
the charge of a single electron. But nothing gave Ritty the thrill of math
team. Squads of five students from each school met in a classroom, the
two teams sitting in a line, and a teacher would present a series of
problems. These were designed with special cleverness. By agreement
they could require no calculus—nothing more than standard algebra—yet
the routines of algebra as taught in class would never suffice within the
specified time. There was always some trick, or shortcut, without which the
problem would just take too long. Or else there was no built-in shortcut; a
student had to invent one that the designer had not foreseen.

According to the fashion of educators, students were often taught that
using the proper methods mattered more than getting the correct answer.
Here only the answer mattered. Students could fill the scratch pads with
gibberish as long as they reached a solution and drew a circle around it.
The mind had to learn indirection and flexibility. Head-on attacks were
second best. Feynman lived for these competitions. Other boys were
president and vice president, but Ritty was team captain, and the team
always won. The team’s number-two student, sitting directly behind
Feynman, would calculate furiously with his pencil, often beating the clock,
and meanwhile he had a sensation that Feynman, in his peripheral vision,
was not writing—never wrote, until the answer came to him. You are rowing
a boat upstream. The river flows at three miles per hour; your speed
against the current is four and one-quarter. You lose your hat on the water.
Forty-five minutes later you realize it is missing and execute the
instantaneous, acceleration-free about-face that such puzzles depend on.
How long does it take to row back to your floating hat?

A simpler problem than most. Given a few minutes, the algebra is
routine. But a student whose head starts filling with 3s and 4¼s, adding
them or subtracting them, has already lost. This is a problem about

reference frames. The river’s motion is irrelevant—as irrelevant as the
earth’s motion through the solar system or the solar system’s motion
through the galaxy. In fact all the velocities are just so much foliage. Ignore
them, place your point of reference at the floating hat—think of yourself
floating like the hat, the water motionless about you, the banks an irrelevant
blur—now watch the boat, and you see at once, as Feynman did, that it will
return in the same forty-five minutes it spent rowing away. For all the best
competitors, the goal was a mental flash, achieved somewhere below
consciousness. In these ideal instants one did not strain toward the answer
so much as relax toward it. Often enough Feynman would get this
unstudied insight while the problem was still being read out, and his
opponents, before they could begin to compute, would see him
ostentatiously write a single number and draw a circle around it. Then he
would let out a loud sigh. In his senior year, when all the city’s public and
private schools competed in the annual championship at New York
University, Feynman placed first.

foxes and 

rabbits across 

imaginary streams 

For most people it was clear enough what mathematics was—a cool
body of facts and rote algorithms, under the established headings of
arithmetic, algebra, geometry, trigonometry, and calculus. A few, though,
always managed to find an entry into a freer and more colorful world, later
called “recreational” mathematics. It was a world where rowboats had to
ferry 
in nonlethal
combinations; where certain tribespeople always lied and others always
told the truth; where gold coins had to be sorted from false-gold in just
three weighings on a balance scale; where painters had to squeeze
twelve-foot ladders around inconveniently sized corners. Some problems
never went away. When an eight-quart jug of wine needed to be divided
evenly, the only measures available were five quarts and three. When a
monkey climbed a rope, the end was always tied to a balancing weight on
the other side of a pulley (a physics problem in disguise). Numbers were
prime or square or perfect. Probability theory suffused games and
paradoxes, where coins were flipped and cards dealt until the head spun.
Infinities multiplied: the infinity of counting numbers turned out to be
demonstrably smaller than the infinity of points on a line. A boy plumbed
geometry exactly as Euclid had, with compass and straightedge, making
triangles and pentagons, inscribing polyhedra in circles, folding paper into

the five Platonic solids. In Feynman’s case, the boy dreamed of glory. He
and his friend Leonard Mautner thought they had found a solution to the
problem of trisecting an angle with the Euclidean tools—a classic
impossibility. Actually they had misunderstood the problem: they could
trisect one side of an equilateral triangle, producing three equal segments,
and they mistakenly assumed that the lines joining those segments to the
far corner mark off equal angles. Riding around the neighborhood on their
bicycles, Ritty and Len excitedly imagined the newspaper headlines: “Two
Children in High School First Learning Geometry Solve the Age-Old
Problem of the Trisection of the Angle.”

This cornucopian world was a place for play, not work. Yet unlike its
stolid high-school counterpart it actually connected here and there to real,
adult mathematics. Illusory though the feeling was at first, Feynman had the
sense of conducting research, solving unsolved problems, actively
exploring a live frontier instead of passively receiving the wisdom of a
dead era. In school every problem had an answer. In recreational
mathematics one could quickly understand and investigate problems that
were open. Mathematical game playing also brought a release from
for
illogic 
authority. Recognizing some 
trigonometric functions, Feynman invented a new notation of his own: √x for
sin √x for cos (x), √x for tan (x). He was free, but he was also extremely
methodical. He memorized tables of logarithms and practiced mentally
deriving values in between. He began to fill notebooks with formulas,
continued fractions whose sums produced the constants π and e.

the customary notation 

in 

A page from one of Feynrnan's teenage notebooks.

A month before he turned fifteen he covered a page with an elated inchhigh scrawl:

THE MOST REMARKABLE

FORMULA
IN MATH.
eiπ + 1 = 0

(FROM SCIENCE HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSE)

By the end of this year he had mastered trigonometry and calculus, both
differential and integral. His teachers could see where he was heading.
After three days of Mr. Augsbury’s geometry class, Mr. Augsbury
abdicated, putting his feet up on his desk and asking Richard to take
charge. In algebra Richard had now taught himself conic sections and
complex numbers, domains where the business of equation solving
acquired a geometrical tinge, the solver having to associate symbols with

curves in the plane or in space. He made sure the knowledge was
practical. His notebooks contained not just the principles of these subjects
but also extensive tables of trigonometric functions and integrals—not
copied but calculated, often by original techniques that he devised for the
purpose. For his calculus notebook he borrowed a title from the primers he
had studied so avidly, Calculus for the Practical Man. When his
classmates handed out yearbook sobriquets, Feynman was not in
contention for the genuinely desirable Most Likely to Succeed and Most
Intellectual. The consensus was Mad Genius.

All Things Are Made of Atoms

The first quantum idea—the notion that indivisible building blocks lay at the
core of things—occurred to someone at least twenty-five hundred years
ago, and with it physics began its slow birth, for otherwise not much can be
understood about earth or water, fire or air. The idea must have seemed
dubious at first. Nothing in the blunt appearance of dirt, marble, leaves,
water, flesh, or bone suggests that it is so. But a few Greek philosophers in
the fifth century B.C. found themselves hard pressed to produce any other
satisfactory possibilities. Things change—crumble, fade, wither, or grow—
yet they remain the same. The notion of immutability seemed to require
some fundamental immutable parts. Their motion and recombination might
give the appearance of change. On reflection, it seemed worthwhile to
regard the basic constituents of matter as unchanging and indivisible:
atomos—uncuttable. Whether they were also uniform was disputed. Plato
thought of atoms as rigid blocks of pure geometry: cubes, octahedrons,
tetrahedrons, and icosahedrons for the four pure elements, earth, air, fire,
and water. Others imagined little hooks holding the atoms together (of
what, though, could these hooks be made?).

Experiment was not the Greek way, but some observations supported
the notion of atoms. Water evaporated; vapor condensed. Animals sent
forth invisible messengers, their scents on the wind. A jar packed with
ashes could still accept water; the volumes did not sum properly,
suggesting interstices within matter. The mechanics were troubling and
remained so. How did these grains move? How did they bind? “Cloudy,

cloudy is the stuff of stones,” wrote the poet Richard Wilbur, and even in the
atomic era it was hard to see how the physicist’s swarming clouds of
particles could give rise to the hard-edged world of everyday sight and
touch.

Someone who trusts science to explain the everyday must continually
make connections between textbook knowledge and real knowledge, the
knowledge we receive and the knowledge we truly own. We are told when
we are young that the earth is round, that it circles the sun, that it spins on a
tilted axis. We may accept the knowledge on faith, the frail teaching of a
modern secular religion. Or we may solder these strands to a frame of
understanding from which it may not so easily be disengaged. We watch
the sun’s arc fall in the sky as winter approaches. We guess the time from
the shadow of a lamppost. We walk across a merry-go-round and strain
against the sideways Coriolis force, and we try to connect the sensation to
our received knowledge of the habits of earthly cyclones: northern
hemisphere, low pressure, counterclockwise. We time the vanishing point
of a tall-masted ship below the horizon. The sun, the winds, the waves all
join in preventing our return to a flat-earth world, where we could watch the
tides follow the moon without understanding.

All things are made of atoms—how much harder it is to reconcile this
received fact with the daily experience of solid tables and chairs. Glancing
at the smooth depressions worn in the stone steps of an office building, we
seldom recognize the cumulative loss of invisibly small particles struck off
by ten million footfalls. Nor do we connect the geometrical facets of a jewel
to a mental picture of atoms stacked like cannonballs, favoring a particular
crystalline orientation and so forcing regular angles visible to the naked
eye. If we do think about the atoms in us and around us, the persistence of
solid stone remains a mystery. Richard Feynman asked a high-school
teacher (and never heard a satisfactory reply), “How do sharp things stay
sharp all this time if the atoms are always jiggling?”

The adult Feynman asked: If all scientific knowledge were lost in a
cataclysm, what single statement would preserve the most information for
the next generations of creatures? How could we best pass on our
understanding of the world? He proposed, “All things are made of
atoms—little particles that move around in perpetual motion, attracting
each other when they are a little distance apart, but repelling upon being

squeezed into one another,” and he added, “In that one sentence, you will
see, there is an enormous amount of information about the world, if just a
little imagination and thinking are applied.” Although millennia had passed
since natural philosophers broached the atomic idea, Feynman’s lifetime
saw the first generations of scientists who truly and universally believed in
it, not just as a mental convenience but as a hard physical reality. As late
as 1922 Bohr, delivering his Nobel Prize address, felt compelled to remind
his listeners that scientists “believe the existence of atoms to be proved
beyond a doubt.” Richard nevertheless read and reread in the Feynmans’
Encyclopaedia Britannica that “pure chemistry, even to-day, has no very
conclusive arguments for the settlement of this controversy.” Stronger
evidence was at hand from the newer science, physics: the phenomenon
called radioactivity seemed to involve the actual disintegration of matter,
so discretely as to produce audible pings or visible blips. Not until the
eighties could people say that they had finally seen atoms. Even then the
seeing was indirect, but it stirred the imagination to see shadowy globules
arrayed in electron-microscope photographs or to see glowing points of
orange light in the laser crossfire of “atom traps.”

forged mathematical relationships 

Not solids but gases began to persuade seventeenth- and eighteenthcentury scientists of matter’s fundamental granularity. In the heady
aftermath of Newton’s revolution scientists made measurements, found
constant quantities, and 
that a
philosophy without numbers had left hidden. Investigators made and
unmade water, ammonia, carbonic acid, potash, and dozens of other
compounds. When they carefully weighed the ingredients and end
products, they discovered regularities. Volumes of hydrogen and oxygen
vanished in a neat two-to-one ratio in the making of water. Robert Boyle
found in England that, although one could vary both the pressure and the
volume of air trapped at a given temperature in a piston, one could not vary
their product. Pressure multiplied by volume was a constant. These
measures were joined by an invisible rod—why? Heating a gas increased
its volume or its pressure. Why?

Heat had seemed to flow from one place to another as an invisible fluid
—“phlogiston” or “caloric.” But a succession of natural philosophers hit on
a less intuitive idea—that heat was motion. It was a brave thought,
because no one could see the things in motion. A scientist had to imagine

uncountable corpuscles banging invisibly this way and that in the soft
pressure of wind against his face. The arithmetic bore out the guess. In
Switzerland Daniel Bernoulli derived Boyle’s law by supposing that
pressure was precisely the force of repeated impacts of spherical
corpuscles, and 
that heat was an
the same way, assuming 
intensification of the motion hither and thither, he derived a link between
temperature and density. The corpuscularians advanced again when
Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier, again with painstaking care, demonstrated that
one could keep reliable account books of the molecules entering and
exiting any chemical reaction, even when gases joined with solids, as in
rusting iron.

in 

“Matter is unchangeable, and consists of points that are perfectly simple,
indivisible, of no extent”—that the atom could itself contain a crowded and
measurable universe remained for a later century to guess—“& separated
from one another.” Ruggiero Boscovich, an eighteenth-century
mathematician and director of optics for the French navy, developed a
view of atoms with a strikingly prescient bearing, a view that Feynman’s
single-sentence credo echoed two centuries later. Boscovich’s atoms
stood not so much for substance as for forces. There was so much to
explain: how matter compresses elastically or inelastically, like rubber or
wax; how objects bounce or recoil; how solids hold together while liquids
congeal or release vapors; “effervescences & fermentations of many
different kinds, in which the particles go & return with as many different
velocities, & now approach towards & now recede from one another.”

The quest to understand the corpuscles translated itself into a need to
understand the invisible attractions and repulsions that gave matter its
visible qualities. Attracting each other when they are a little distance
apart, but repelling upon being squeezed into one another, Feynman
would say simply. That mental picture was already available to a bright
high-school student in 1933. Two centuries had brought more and more
precise inquiry into the chemical behavior of substances. The elements
had proliferated. Even a high-school laboratory could run an electric current
through a beaker of water to separate it into its explosive constituents,
hydrogen and oxygen. Chemistry as packaged in educational chemistry
sets seemed to have reduced itself to a mechanical collection of rules and
recipes. But the fundamental questions remained for those curious enough

to ask, How do solids stay solid, with atoms always “jiggling”? What forces
control the fluid motions of air and water, and what agitation of atoms
engenders fire?

A Century of Progress

By then the search for forces had produced a decade of reinterpretation of
the nature of the atom. The science known as chemical physics was giving
way rapidly to the sciences that would soon be known as nuclear and highenergy physics. Those studying the chemical properties of different
substances were trying to assimilate the first startling findings of quantum
mechanics. The American Physical Society met that summer in Chicago.
The chemist Linus Pauling spoke on the implications of quantum
mechanics for complex organic molecules, primitive components of life.
John C. Slater, a physicist from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
struggled to make a connection between the quantum mechanical view of
electrons and the energies that chemists could measure. And then the
meeting spilled onto the fairgrounds of the spectacular 1933 Chicago
World’s Fair, “A Century of Progress.” Niels Bohr himself spoke on the
unsettling problem of measuring anything in the new physics. Before a
crowd of visitors both sitting and standing, his ethereal Danish tones often
smothered by crying babies and a balking microphone, he offered a
principle that he called “complementarity,” a recognition of an inescapable
duality at the heart of things. He claimed revolutionary import for this notion.
Not just atomic particles, but all reality, he said, fell under its sway. “We
have been forced to recognize that we must modify not only all our
concepts of classical physics but even the ideas we use in everyday life,”
he said. He had lately been meeting with Professor Einstein (their
discussions were actually more discordant than Bohr now let on), and they
had found no way out. “We have to renounce a description of phenomena
based on the concept of cause and effect.”

Elsewhere amid the throngs at the fairground that summer, enduring the
stifling heat, were Melville, Lucille, Richard, and Joan Feynman. For the
occasion Joan had been taught to eat bacon with a knife and fork; then the
Feynmans strapped suitcases to the back of a car and headed off

crosscountry, a seemingly endless drive on the local roads of the era
before interstate highways. On the way they stayed at farmhouses. The fair
spread across four hundred acres on the shore of Lake Michigan, and the
emblems of science were everywhere. Progress indeed: the fair
celebrated a public sense of science that was reaching a crest.
Knowledge Is Power—that earnest motto adorned a book of Richard’s
called The Boy Scientist. Science was invention and betterment; it
changed the way people lived. The eponymous business enterprises of
Edison, Bell, and Ford were knotting the countryside with networks of wire
and pavement—an altogether positive good, it seemed. How wonderful
were these manifestations of the photon and the electron, lighting lights
and bearing voices across hundreds of miles!

Even in the trough of the Depression the wonder of science fueled an
optimistic faith in the future. Just over the horizon were fast airships, halfmile-high skyscrapers, and technological cures for diseases of the human
body and the body politic. Who knew where the bright young students of
today would be able to carry the world? One New York writer painted a
picture of his city fifty years in the future: New York in 1982 would hold a
magnificent fifty million people, he predicted, the East River and much of
the Hudson River having been “filled in.” “Traffic arrangements will no doubt
have provided for several tiers of elevated roadways and noiseless
railways—built on extended balconies flanking the enormous skyscrapers
…” Nourishment will come from concentrated pellets. Ladies’ dress will be
streamlined to something like the 1930s bathing suit. The hero of this
fantasy was the “high-school genius (who generally knows more than
anybody else).” There was no limit to the hopes vested in the young.

Scientists, too, struggled to assimilate the new images pouring into the
culture from the laboratory. Electricity powered the human brain itself, a
University of Chicago researcher announced that summer; the brain’s
central switchboard used vast numbers of connecting lines to join brain
cells, each one of which could be considered both a tiny chemical factory
and electric battery. Chicago’s business community made the most of
these symbols, 
four
In an opening-day stunt, 
astronomical observatories used faint rays of starlight from Arcturus, forty
light-years distant, focused by telescopes and electrically amplified, to turn
on the lights of the exposition. “Here are gathered the evidences of man’s

technicians at 

too. 

achievements in the realm of physical science, proofs of his power to
prevail over all the perils that beset him,” declared Rufus C. Dawes,
president of the fair corporation, as loud projectiles released hundreds of
American flags in the sky over the fairgrounds. Life-size dinosaurs awed
visitors. A robot gave lectures. Visitors less interested in science could
pay to see an unemployed actress named Sally Rand dance with ostrichfeather fans. The Feynmans, though, took the Sky Ride, suspended on
cables between two six-hundred-foot towers, and visited the Hall of
Science, where a 151-word wall motto summed up the history of science
from Pythagoras to Euclid to Newton to Einstein.

The Feynmans had never heard of Bohr or any of the other physicists
gathering in Chicago, but, like most other American newspaper readers,
they knew Einstein’s name well. That summer he was traveling in Europe,
uprooted, having left Germany for good, preparing to arrive in New York
Harbor in October. For fourteen years America had been in the throes of a
publicity craze over this “mathematician.” The New York Times, the
Feynmans’ regular paper, had led a wave of exaltation with only one
precedent, the near deification of Edison a generation earlier. No
theoretical scientist, European or American, before or since, ignited such
a fever of adulation. A part of the legend, the truest part, was the
revolutionary import of relativity for the way citizens of the twentieth century
should conceive their universe. Another part was Einstein’s supposed
claim that only twelve people worldwide could understand his work. “Lights
All Askew in the Heavens,” the Times reported in a 1919 classic of
headline writing. “Einstein Theory Triumphs. Stars Not Where They Seem
or Were Calculated to Be, but Nobody Need Worry. A Book for 12 Wise
Men. No More in the World Could Comprehend It, Said Einstein.” A series
of editorials followed. One was titled “Assaulting the Absolute.” Another
declared jovially, “Apprehensions for the safety of confidence even in the
multiplication table will arise.”

The presumed obscurity of relativity contributed heavily to its popularity.
Yet had Einstein’s message really been incomprehensible it could hardly
have spread so well. More than one hundred books arrived to explain the
mystery. The newspapers mixed tones of reverence and self-deprecating
amusement about the mystery of relativity’s paradoxes; in actuality, they
and their readers correctly understood the elements of this new physics.

Space is curved—curved where gravity warps its invisible fabric. The ether
is banished, along with the assumption of an absolute frame of reference
for space and time. Light has a fixed velocity, measured at 186,000 miles
per second, and its path bends in the sway of gravity. Not long after the
general theory of relativity was transmitted by underwater cable to eager
New York newspapers, schoolchildren who could barely compute the
hypotenuse of a right triangle could nevertheless recite a formula of
Einstein’s, E equals MC squared, and some could even report its
implication: that matter and energy are theoretically interchangeable; that
within the atom lay unreleased a new source of power. They sensed, too,
that the universe had shrunk. It was no longer merely everything—an
unimaginable totality. Now it might be bounded, thanks to four-dimensional
curvature, and somehow it began to seem artificial. As the English
physicist J. J. Thomson said unhappily, “We have Einstein’s space, de
Sitter’s space, expanding universes, contracting universes, vibrating
universes, mysterious universes. In fact the pure mathematician may
create universes just by writing down an equation … he can have a
universe of his own.”

There will never be another Einstein—just as there will never be another
Edison, another Heifetz, another Babe Ruth, figures towering so far above
their contemporaries that they stood out as legends, heroes, half-gods in
the culture’s imagination. There will be, and almost certainly have already
been, scientists, inventors, violinists, and baseball players with the same
raw genius. But the world has grown too large for such singular heroes.
When there are a dozen Babe Ruths, there are none. In the early twentieth
century, millions of Americans could name exactly one contemporary
scientist. In the late twentieth century, anyone who can name a scientist at
all can name a half-dozen or more. Einstein’s publicists, too, belonged to a
more naïve era; icons are harder to build in a time of demythologizing,
deconstruction, and pathography. Those celebrating Einstein had the will
and the ability to remake the popular conception of scientific genius. It
seemed that Edison’s formula favoring perspiration over inspiration did not
apply to this inspired, abstracted thinker. Einstein’s genius seemed nearly
divine in its creative power: he imagined a certain universe and this
universe was born. Genius seemed to imply a detachment from the
mundane, and it seemed to entail wisdom. Like sports heroes in the era

before television, he was seen exclusively from a distance. Not much of the
real person interfered with the myth. By now, too, he had changed from the
earnest, ascetic-looking young clerk whose genius had reached its
productive peak in the first and second decades of the century. The public
had hardly seen that man at all. Now Einstein’s image drew on a colorful
and absentminded appearance—wild hair, ill-fitting clothes, the legendary
socklessness. The mythologizing of Einstein occasionally extended to
others. When Paul A. M. Dirac, the British quantum theorist, visited the
University of Wisconsin in 1929, the Wisconsin State Journal published a
mocking piece about “a fellow they have up at the U. this spring … who is
pushing Sir Isaac Newton, Einstein and all the others off the front page.” An
American scientist, the reporter said, would be busy and active, “but Dirac
is different. He seems to have all the time there is in the world and his
heaviest work is looking out the window.” Dirac’s end of the dialogue was
suitably monosyllabic. (The Journal’s readers must have assumed he was
an ancient eminence; actually he was just twenty-seven years old.)

“Now doctor will you give me in a few words the low-down on all

your investigations?”
 “No.”
 “Good. Will it be all right if I put it this way—‘Professor Dirac solves
all the problems of mathematical physics, but is unable to find a better
way of figuring out Babe Ruth’s batting average’?”
 “Yes.”
 …
 “Do you go to the movies?”
 “Yes.”
 “When?”
 “In 1920—perhaps also 1930.”

The genius was otherworldly and remote. More than the practical
Americans whose science meant gizmos and machines, Europeans such
as Einstein and Dirac also incarnated the culture’s standard oddball view
of the scientist. “Is he the tall, backward boy … ?” Barbara Stanwyck’s
character asked in The Lady Eve about Henry Fonda’s, an ophiologist
roughly Feynman’s age.

—He isn’t backward, he’s a scientist.
—Oh, is that what it is. I knew he was peculiar.

“Peculiar” meant harmless. It meant that brilliant men paid for their gifts
with compensating, humanizing flaws. There was an element of selfdefense in the popular view. And there was a little truth. Many scientists did
walk through the ordinary world seeming out of place, their minds
elsewhere. They sometimes failed to master the arts of dressing carefully
or making social conversation.

Had the Journal’s reporter solicited Dirac’s opinion of the state of
American science, he might have provoked a longer comment. “There are
no physicists in America,” Dirac had said bitingly, in more private
company. It was too harsh an assessment, but the margin of his error was
only a few years, and when Dirac spoke of physics he meant something
new. Physics was not about vacuum cleaners or rayon or any of the
technological wonders spreading in that decade; it was not about lighting
lights or broadcasting radio waves; it was not even about measuring the
charge of the electron or the frequency spectra of glowing gases in
laboratory experiments. It was about a vision of reality so fractured,
accidental, and tenuous that it frightened those few older American
physicists who saw it coming.

“I feel that there is a real world corresponding to our sense perceptions,”
Yale University’s chief physicist, John Zeleny, defensively 
told a
Minneapolis audience. “I believe that Minneapolis is a real city and not
simply a city of my dreams.” What Einstein had (or had not) said about
relativity was truer of quantum mechanics: a bare handful of people had the
mathematics needed to understand it.

Richard and Julian

Summer brought a salty heat to Far Rockaway, the wind rising across the
beaches. The asphalt shimmered with refractive air. In winter, snow fell
early from low, gray clouds; then dazzlingly white hours would pass, the sky
too bright to see clearly. Free and impudent times—Richard lost himself in
his notebooks, or roamed to the drugstore, where he would play a mean-

spirited optical-hydrodynamical trick on the waitress by inverting a glass of
water over a one-penny tip on the smooth tabletop.

On the beach some days he watched a particular girl. She had warm,
deep blue eyes and long hair that she wore deftly knotted up in a braid.
After swimming she would comb it out, and boys Richard knew from school
would flock around her. Her name was Arline (for a long time Richard
thought it was spelled the usual way, “Arlene”) Greenbaum, and she lived in
Cedarhurst, Long Island, just across the city line. He dreamed about her.
He thought she was wonderful and beautiful, but getting to know girls
seemed hopeless enough, and Arline, he discovered, already had a
boyfriend. Even so, he followed her into an after-school social league
sponsored by the synagogue. Arline joined an art class, so Richard joined
the art class, overlooking a lack of aptitude. Shortly he found himself lying
on the floor and breathing through a straw, while another student made a
plaster cast of his face.

If Arline noticed Richard, she did not let on. But one evening she arrived
at a boy-girl party in the middle of a kissing session. An older boy was
teaching couples the correct lip angles and nose positions, and in this
instructional context a certain amount of practice was under way. Richard
himself was practicing, with a girl he hardly knew. When Arline came in,
there was a little commotion. Almost everyone got up to greet her—
everyone, it seemed to her, but one horribly rude boy, off in the corner, who
ostentatiously kept on kissing.

Occasionally Richard went on dates with other girls. He could never rid
himself of a sense that he was a stranger engaging in a ritual the rules to
which he did not know. His mother taught him some basic manners. Even
so, the waiting in a girl’s parlor with her parents, the procedures for cutting
in at dances, the stock phrases (“Thank you for a lovely evening”) all left
him feeling inept, as if he could not quite decipher a code everyone else
had mastered.

He stayed not quite conscious of the hopes his parents had for him. He
was not quite aware of the void left by the death of his infant brother—his
mother still thought of the baby often—or of his mother’s social descent to
the lower middle class, in increasingly tight circumstances. With the
coming of the Depression the Feynmans had to give up the house and
yard on New Broadway and move to a small apartment, where they used a

dining room and a breakfast room as bedrooms. Melville was often on the
road now, selling. When he was home, he would read the National
Geographic magazines that he collected secondhand. On Sundays he
would go outdoors and paint woodland scenery or flowers. Or he and
Richard would take Joan into the city to the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
They went to the Egyptian section, first studying glyphs in the encyclopedia
so that they could stand and decode bits of the chiseled artifacts, a sight
that made people stare.

Richard still had some tinkering and probing to do. The Depression
broadened the market for inexpensive radio repair, and Richard found
himself in demand. In just over a decade of full-scale commercial
production, the radio had penetrated nearly half of American households.
By 1932 the average price of a new set had fallen to $48, barely a third of
the price just three years before. “Midget” sets had arrived, just five tubes
compactly arranged within an astonishing six-pound box, containing its
own built-in aerial and a shrunken loudspeaker the size of a paper dollar.
Some receivers offered knobs that would let the user adjust the high and
low tones separately; some advertised high style, like the “satin-finished
ebony black Durez with polished chromium grille and trimmings.”

Broken radios confronted Richard with a whole range of pathologies in
the circuits he had learned so well. He rewired a plug or climbed a
neighbor’s roof to install an antenna. He looked for clues, wax on a
condenser or telltale charcoal on a burned-out resistor. Later he made a
story out of it—“He Fixes Radios by Thinking!” The hero was an
exaggeratedly young boy, with a comically large screwdriver sticking out of
his back pocket, who solved an ever-more-challenging sequence of
puzzles. The last and best broken radio—the one that established his
reputation—made a bloodcurdling howl when first turned on. Richard
paced back and forth, thinking, while the curmudgeonly owner badgered
him: “What are you doing? Can you fix it?” Richard thought about it. What
could be making a noise that changed with time? It must have something
to do with the heating of the tubes—first some extraneous signal was
swollen into a shriek; then it settled back to normal. Richard stopped
pacing, went back to the set, pulled out one tube, pulled out a second tube,
and exchanged them. He turned on the set, and the noise had vanished.
The boy who fixes radios by thinking—that was how he saw himself,

reflected in the eyes of his customers in Far Rockaway. Reason worked.
Equations could be trusted; they were more than schoolbook exercises.
The heady rush of solving a puzzle, of feeling the mental pieces shift and
fade and rearrange themselves until suddenly they slid into their grooves—
the sense of power and sheer rightness—these pleasures sustained an
addiction. Luxuriating in the buoyant joy of it, Feynman could sink into a
trance of concentration that even his family found unnerving.

Knowledge was rarer then. A secondhand magazine was an occasion.
For a Far Rockaway teenager merely to find a mathematics textbook took
will and enterprise. Each radio program, each telephone call, each lecture
in a local synagogue, each movie at the new Gem theater on Mott Avenue
carried the weight of something special. Each book Richard possessed
burned itself into his memory. When a primer on mathematical methods
baffled him, he worked through it formula by formula, filling a notebook with
self-imposed exercises. He and his friends traded mathematical tidbits
like baseball cards. If a boy named Morrie Jacobs told him that the cosine
of 20 degrees multiplied by the cosine of 40 degrees multiplied by the
cosine of 80 degrees equaled exactly one-eighth, he would remember that
curiosity for the rest of his life, and he would remember that he was
standing in Morrie’s father’s leather shop when he learned it.

Even with the radio era in full swing, one’s senses encountered nothing
like the bombardment of images and sounds that television would bring—
accelerated, flash-cut, disposable knowledge. For now, knowledge was
scarce and therefore dear. It was the same for scientists. The currency of
scientific information had not yet been devalued by excess. For a young
student, that meant that the most timely questions were surprisingly close
to hand. Feynman recognized early the special, distinctive feeling of being
close to the edge of knowledge, where people do not know the answers.
Even in grade school, when he would haunt the laboratory late in the
afternoon, playing with magnets and helping a teacher clean up, he
recognized the pleasure of asking questions that the teacher could not
handle. Now, graduating from high school, he could not tell how near or
how far he was from science’s active frontier, where scientists pulled fresh
problems like potatoes from the earth, and in fact he was not far. The
upheaval caused by quantum mechanics had laid the fundamental issues
bare. Physics was still a young science, more obscure than any human

knowledge to date, yet still something of a family business. Its written
record remained small, even as whole new scientific frameworks—nuclear
physics, quantum field theory—were being born. The literature sustained
just a handful of journals, still mostly in Europe. Richard knew nothing of
these.

Across town, another precocious teenager, named Julian Schwinger,
had quietly inserted himself into the world of the new physics. He was
already as much a creature of the city as Feynman was of the city’s
outskirts: the younger son of a well-to-do garment maker, growing up in
Jewish Harlem and then on Riverside Drive, where dark, stately apartment
buildings and stone town houses followed the curve of the Hudson River.
The drive was built for motor traffic, but truck horses still pulled loads of
boxes to the merchants of Broadway, a few blocks east. Schwinger knew
how to find books; he often prowled the used-book stores of lower Fourth
and Fifth Avenues for advanced texts on mathematics and physics. He
attended Townsend Harris High School, a nationally famous institution
associated with the City College of New York, and even before he entered
City College, in 1934, when he was sixteen, he found out what physics was
—the modern physics. With his long, serious face and slightly stooped
shoulders he would sit in the college’s library and read papers by Dirac in
the Proceedings of the Royal Society of London or the Physikalische
Zeitschrift der Sowjetunion. He also read the Physical Review, now forty
years past its founding; it had advanced from monthly to biweekly
publication in hopes of competing more nimbly with the European journals.
Schwinger struck his teachers as intensely shy. He carried himself with a
premature elegant dignity.

That year he carefully typed out on six legal-size sheets his first real
physics paper, “On the Interaction of Several Electrons,” and the same
elegance was evident. It assumed for a starting point the central new tenet
of field theory: “that two particles do not interact directly but, rather the
interaction is explained as being caused by one of the particles influencing
the field in its vicinity, which influence spreads until it reaches the second
particle.” Electrons do not simply bounce off one another, that is. They plow
through that magnificent ether substitute, the field; the waves they make
then swish up against other electrons. Schwinger did not pretend to break
ground in this paper. He showed his erudition by adopting “the quantum

electrodynamics of Dirac, Fock, and Podolsky,” 
the “Heisenberg
representation” of potentials in empty space, the “Lorentz-Heaviside units”
for expressing such potentials in relatively compact equations. This was
heavy machinery in soft terrain. The field of Maxwell, which brought
electricity and magnetism together so effectively, now had to be quantized,
built up from finite-size packets that could be reduced no further. Its waves
were simultaneously smooth and choppy. Schwinger, in his first effort at
professional physics, looked beyond even this difficult electromagnetic
field to a more abstract field still, a field twice removed from tangible
substance, buoying not particles but mathematical operators. He pursued
this conception through a sequence of twenty-eight equations. Once, at
equation 20, he was forced to pause. A fragment of the equation had
grown unmanageable—infinite, in fact. To the extent that this fragment
corresponded to something physical, it was the tendency of an electron to
act on itself. Having shaken its field, the electron is shaken back, with (so
the mathematics insisted) infinite energy. Dirac and the others had
grudgingly settled on a response to this difficulty, and Schwinger handled it
in the prescribed manner: he simply discarded the offending term and
moved on to equation 21.

Julian Schwinger and Richard Feynman, exact contemporaries,
obsessed as sixteen-year-olds with the abstract mental world of a
scientist, had already set out on different paths. Schwinger studying the
newest of the new physics, Feynman filling schoolboy notebooks with
standard mathematical formulas, Schwinger entering the arena of his
elders, Feynman still trying to impress his peers with practical jokes,
Schwinger striving inward toward the city’s intellectual center, Feynman
haunting the beaches and sidewalks of its periphery—they would hardly
have known what to say to each other. They would not meet for another
decade; not until Los Alamos. Long afterward, when they were old men,
after they had shared a Nobel Prize for work done as rivals, they amazed a
dinner party by competing to see who could most quickly recite from
memory the alphabetical headings on the spines of their half-century-old
edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica.

As his childhood ended, Richard worked at odd 

for a
neighborhood printer or for his aunt, who managed one of the smaller Far
Rockaway resort hotels. He applied to colleges. His grades were perfect

jobs, 

or near perfect in mathematics and science but less than perfect in other
subjects, and colleges in the thirties enforced quotas in the admission of
Jews. Richard spent fifteen dollars on a special entrance examination for
Columbia University, and after he was turned down he long resented the
loss of the fifteen dollars. MIT accepted him.

MIT

A seventeen-year-old freshman, Theodore Welton, helped some of the
older students operate the wind-tunnel display at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology’s Spring Open House in 1936. Like so many of his
classmates he had arrived at the Tech knowing all about airplanes,
electricity, and chemicals and revering Albert Einstein. He was from a
small town, Saratoga Springs, New York. With most of his first year behind
him, he had lost none of his confidence. When his duties ended, he walked
around and looked at the other exhibits. A miniature science fair of current
projects made the open house a showcase for parents and visitors from
Boston. He wandered over to the mathematics exhibit, and there, amid a
crowd, his ears sticking out noticeably from a very fresh face, was what
looked like another first-year boy, inappropriately taking charge of a
complex, suitcase-size mechanical-mathematical device called a
harmonic analyzer. This boy was pouring out explanations in a charged-up
voice and fielding questions like a congressman at a press conference.
The machine could take any arbitrary wave and break it down into a sum of
simple sine and cosine waves. Welton, his own ears burning, listened
while Dick Feynman rapidly explained the workings of the Fourier
transform, the advanced mathematical technique for analyzing complicated
wave forms, a piece of privileged knowledge that Welton until that moment
had felt sure no other freshman possessed.

Welton (who liked to be called by his initials, T. A.) already knew he was
a physics major. Feynman had vacillated twice. He began in mathematics.
He passed an examination that let him jump ahead to the second-year
calculus course, covering differential equations and integration in threedimensional space. This still came easily, and Feynman thought he should
have taken the second-year examination as well. But he also began to
wonder whether this was the career he wanted. American professional
mathematics of the thirties was enforcing its rigor and abstraction as never
before, disdaining what outsiders would call “applications.” To Feynman—
having finally reached a place where he was surrounded by fellow tinkerers

and radio buffs—mathematics began to seem too abstract and too far
removed.

In the stories modern physicists have made of their own lives, a fateful
moment is often the one in which they realize that their interest no longer
lies in mathematics. Mathematics is always where they begin, for no other
school course shows off their gifts so clearly. Yet a crisis comes: they
experience an epiphany, or endure a slowly building disgruntlement, and
plunge or drift into this other, hybrid field. Werner Heisenberg, seventeen
years older than Feynman, experienced his moment of crisis at the
University of Munich, in the office of the local statesman of mathematics,
Ferdinand von Lindemann. For some reason Heisenberg could never
forget Lindemann’s horrid yapping black dog. It reminded him of the
poodle in Faust and made it impossible for him to think clearly when the
professor, learning that Heisenberg was reading Weyl’s new book about
relativity theory, told him, “In that case you are completely lost to
mathematics.” Feynman himself, halfway through his freshman year,
reading Eddington’s book about relativity theory, confronted his own
department chairman with the classic question about mathematics: What
is it good for? He got the classic answer: If you have to ask, you are in the
wrong field. Mathematics seemed suited only for teaching mathematics.
His department chairman suggested calculating actuarial probabilities for
insurance companies. This was not a joke. The vocational landscape had
just been surveyed by one Edward J. v. K. Menge, Ph.D., Sc.D., who
published his findings in a monograph titled Jobs for the College
Graduate in Science. “The American mind is taken up largely with
applications rather than with fundamental principles,” Menge noticed. “It is
what 
for would-be
mathematicians: “The mathematician has little opportunity of employment
except in the universities in some professorial capacity. He may become a
practitioner of his profession, it is true, if he acts as an actuary for some
large insurance company… .” Feynman changed to electrical engineering.
Then he changed again, to physics.

‘practical.’” This 

is known as 

little room 

left 

Not that physics promised much more as a vocation. The membership
of the American Physical Society still fell shy of two thousand, though it had
doubled in a decade. Teaching at a college or working for the government
in, most likely, the Bureau of Standards or the Weather Bureau, a physicist

might expect to earn a good wage of from three thousand to six thousand
dollars a year. But the Depression had forced the government and the
leading corporate laboratories to lay off nearly half of their staff scientists.
A Harvard physics professor, Edwin C. Kemble, reported that finding jobs
for graduating physicists had become a “nightmare.” Not many arguments
could be made for physics as a vocation.

Menge, putting his pragmatism aside for a moment, offered perhaps the
only one: Does the student, he asked, “feel the craving of adding to the
sum total of human knowledge? Or does he want to see his work go on
and on and his influence spread like the ripples on a placid lake into which
a stone has been cast? In other words, is he so fascinated with simply
knowing the subject that he cannot rest until he learns all he can about it?”

I. 

like 

Of the leading men in American physics MIT had three of the best, John
C. Slater, Philip M. Morse, and Julius A. Stratton. They came from a more
standard mold—gentlemanly, homebred, Christian—than some of the
physicists who would soon eclipse them, foreigners like Hans Bethe and
Eugene Wigner, who had just arrived at Cornell University and Princeton
University, respectively, and Jews 
I. Rabi and J. Robert
Oppenheimer, who had been hired at Columbia University and the
University of California at Berkeley, despite anti-Semitic misgivings at both
places. Stratton later became president of MIT, and Morse became the
first director of the Brookhaven National Laboratory for Nuclear Research.
The department head was Slater. He had been one of the young
Americans studying overseas, though he was not as deeply immersed in
the flood tides of European physics as, for example, Rabi, who made the
full circuit: Zurich, Munich, Copenhagen, Hamburg, Leipzig, and Zurich
again. Slater had studied briefly at Cambridge University in 1923, and
somehow he missed the chance to meet Dirac, though they attended at
least one course together.

Slater and Dirac crossed paths intellectually again and again during the
decade that followed. Slater kept making minor discoveries that Dirac had
made a few months earlier. He found this disturbing. It seemed to Slater
furthermore that Dirac enshrouded his discoveries in an unnecessary and
somewhat baffling web of mathematical formalism. Slater tended to
mistrust them. In fact he mistrusted the whole imponderable miasma of
philosophy now flowing from the European schools of quantum mechanics:

assertions about the duality or complementarity or “Jekyll-Hyde” nature of
things; doubts about time and chance; the speculation about the interfering
role of the human observer. “I do not like mystiques; I like to be definite,”
Slater said. Most of the European physicists were reveling in such issues.
Some felt an obligation to face the consequences of their equations. They
recoiled from the possibility of simply putting their formidable new
technology to work without developing a physical picture to go along with it.
As they manipulated their matrices or shuffled their differential equations,
questions kept creeping in. Where is that particle when no one is looking?
At the ancient stone-built universities philosophy remained the coin of the
realm. A theory about the spontaneous, whimsical birth of photons in the
energy decay of excited atoms—an effect without a cause—gave
scientists a sledgehammer to wield in late-evening debates about Kantian
causality. Not so in America. “A theoretical physicist in these days asks
just one thing of his theories,” Slater said defiantly soon after Feynman
arrived at MIT. The theories must make reasonably good predictions about
experiments. That is all.

He does not ordinarily argue about philosophical implications… .
Questions about a theory which do not affect its ability to predict
experimental results correctly seem to me quibbles about words, …
and I am quite content to leave such questions to those who derive
some satisfaction from them.

When Slater spoke for common sense, for practicality, for a theory that
would be experiment’s handmaid, he spoke for most of his American
colleagues. The spirit of Edison, not Einstein, still governed their image of
the scientist. Perspiration, not inspiration. Mathematics was unfathomable
and unreliable. Another physicist, Edward Condon, said everyone knew
what mathematical physicists did: “they study carefully the results obtained
by experimentalists and rewrite that work in papers which are so
mathematical that they find them hard to read themselves.” Physics could
really only justify itself, he said, when its theories offered people a means
of predicting the outcome of experiments—and at that, only if the
predicting took less time than actually carrying out the experiments.

Unlike their European counterparts, American theorists did not have

their own academic departments. They shared quarters with 
the
experimenters, heard their problems, and tried to answer their questions
pragmatically. Still, the days of Edisonian science were over and Slater
knew it. With a mandate from MIT’s president, Karl Compton, he was
assembling a physics department meant to bring the school into the
forefront of American science and meanwhile to help American science
toward a less humble world standing. He and his colleagues knew how
unprepared the United States had been to train physicists in his own
generation. Leaders of the nation’s rapidly growing technical industries
knew it, too. When Slater arrived, the MIT department sustained barely a
dozen graduate students. Six years later, the number had increased to
sixty. Despite the Depression the institute had completed a new physics
and chemistry laboratory with money from the industrialist George
Eastman. Major research programs had begun in the laboratory fields
devoted to using electromagnetic radiation as a probe into the structure of
matter: especially spectroscopy, analyzing the signature frequencies of
light shining from different substances, but also X-ray crystallography.
(Each time physicists found a new kind of “ray” or particle, they put it to
work illuminating the interstices of molecules.) New vacuum equipment and
finely etched mirrors gave a high precision to the spectroscopic work. And
a monstrous new electromagnet created fields more powerful than any on
the planet.

Julius Stratton and Philip Morse taught the essential advanced theory
course for seniors and graduate students, Introduction to Theoretical
Physics, using Slater’s own text of the same name. Slater and his
colleagues had created the course just a few years before. It was the
capstone of their new thinking about the teaching of physics at MIT. They
meant to bring back together, as a unified subject, the discipline that had
been subdivided for undergraduates into mechanics, electromagnetism,
thermodynamics, hydrodynamics, and optics. Undergraduates had been
acquiring their theory piecemeal, in ad hoc codas to laboratory courses
mainly devoted to experiment. Slater now brought the pieces back
together and led students toward a new topic, the “modern atomic theory.”
No course yet existed in quantum mechanics, but Slater’s students headed
inward toward the atom with a grounding not just in classical mechanics,
treating the motion of solid objects, but also in wave mechanics—vibrating

strings, sound waves bouncing around in hollow boxes. The instructors told
the students at the outset that the essence of theoretical physics lay not in
learning to work out the mathematics, but in learning how to apply the
mathematics to the real phenomena that could take so many chameleon
forms: moving bodies, fluids, magnetic fields and forces, currents of
electricity and water, and waves of water and light. Feynman, as a
freshman, roomed with two seniors who took the course. As the year went
on he attuned himself to their chatter and surprised them sometimes by
joining in on the problem solving. “Why don’t you try Bernoulli’s equation?”
he would say—mispronouncing Bernoulli because, like so much of his
knowledge, this came from reading the encyclopedia or the odd textbooks
he had found in Far Rockaway. By sophomore year he decided he was
ready to take the course himself.

The first day everyone had to fill out enrollment cards: green for seniors
and brown for graduate students. Feynman was proudly aware of the
sophomore-pink card in his own pocket. Furthermore he was wearing an
ROTC uniform; officer’s training was compulsory for first- and second-year
students. But just as he was feeling most conspicuous, another uniformed,
pink-card-carrying sophomore sat down beside him. It was T. A. Welton.
Welton had instantly recognized the mathematics whiz from the previous
spring’s open house.

Feynman looked at the books Welton was stacking on his desk. He saw
Tullio Levi-Civita’s Absolute Differential Calculus, a book he had tried to
get from the library. Welton, meanwhile, looked at Feynman’s desk and
realized why he had not been able to find A. P. Wills’s Vector and Tensor
Analysis. Nervous boasting ensued. The Saratoga Springs sophomore
claimed to know all about general relativity. The Far Rockaway sophomore
announced that he had already learned quantum mechanics from a book
by someone called Dirac. They traded several hours’ worth of sketchy
knowledge about Einstein’s work on gravitation. Both boys realized that,
as Welton put it, “cooperation in the struggle against a crew of aggressivelooking seniors and graduate students might be mutually beneficial.”

Nor were they alone in recognizing that Introduction to Theoretical
Physics now harbored a pair of exceptional young students. Stratton,
handling the teaching chores for the first semester, would sometimes lose
the thread of a string of equations at the blackboard, the color of his face

shifting perceptibly toward red. He would then pass the chalk, saying, “Mr.
Feynman, how did you handle this problem,” and Feynman would stride to
the blackboard.

The Best Path

A law of nature expressed in a strange form came up again and again that
term: the principle of least action. It arose in a simple sort of problem. A
lifeguard, some feet up the beach, sees a drowning swimmer diagonally
ahead, some distance offshore and some distance to one side. The
lifeguard can run at a certain speed and swim at a certain lesser speed.
How does one find the fastest path to the swimmer?

The path of least time. The lifeguard travels faster on land than in water; the best
path is a compromise. Light-which also travels faster through air than through waterseems somehow to choose precisely this path on its way from an underwater fish to the
eye of an observer.

A straight line, the shortest path, is not the fastest. The lifeguard will
spend too much time in the water. If instead he angles far up the beach and
dives in directly opposite the swimmer—the path of least water—he still
wastes time. The best compromise is the path of least time, angling up the

beach and then turning for a sharper angle through the water. Any calculus
student can find the best path. A lifeguard has to trust his instincts. The
mathematician Pierre de Fermat guessed in 1661 that the bending of a
ray of light as it passes from air into water or glass—the refraction that
makes possible lenses and mirages—occurs because light behaves like a
lifeguard with perfect instincts. It follows the path of least time. (Fermat,
reasoning backward, surmised that light must travel more slowly in denser
media. Later Newton and his followers thought they had proved the
opposite: that light, like sound, travels faster through water than through air.
Fermat, with his faith in a principle of simplicity, was right.)

Theology, philosophy, and physics had not yet become so distinct from
one another, and scientists found it natural to ask what sort of universe
God would make. Even in the quantum era the question had not fully
disappeared from the scientific consciousness. Einstein did not hesitate to
invoke His name. Yet when Einstein doubted that God played dice with the
world, or when he uttered phrases like the one later inscribed in the stone
of Fine Hall at Princeton, “The Lord God is subtle, but malicious he is not,”
the great man was playing a delicate game with language. He had found a
formulation easily understood and imitated by physicists, religious or not.
He could express convictions about how the universe ought to be designed
without giving offense either to the most literal believers in God or to his
most disbelieving professional colleagues, who were happy to read God
as a poetic shorthand for whatever laws or principles rule this flux of
matter and energy we happen to inhabit. Einstein’s piety was sincere but
neutral, acceptable even to the vehemently antireligious Dirac, of whom
Wolfgang Pauli once complained, “Our friend Dirac, too, has a religion,
and its guiding principle is ‘There is no God and Dirac is His prophet.’”

Scientists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries also had to play a
double game, and the stakes were higher. Denying God was still a capital
offense, and not just in theory: offenders could be hanged or burned.
Scientists made an assault against faith merely by insisting that knowledge
—some knowledge—must wait on observation and experiment. It was not
so obvious that one category of philosopher should investigate the motion
of falling bodies and another the provenance of miracles. On the contrary,
Newton and his contemporaries happily constructed scientific proofs of
God’s existence or employed God as a premise in a chain of reasoning.

Elementary particles must be indivisible, Newton wrote in his Opticks, “so
very hard as never to wear or break in pieces; no ordinary power being
able to divide what God himself made one in the first creation.” Elementary
particles cannot be indivisible, René Descartes wrote in his Principles of
Philosophy:

There cannot be any atoms or parts of matter which are indivisible
of their own nature (as certain philosophers have imagined)… . For
though God had rendered the particle so small that it was beyond the
power of any creature to divide it, He could not deprive Himself of the
power of division, because it was absolutely impossible that He
should lessen His own omnipotence… .

Could God make atoms so flawed that they could break? Could God
make atoms so perfect that they would defy His power to break them? It
was only one of the difficulties thrown up by God’s omnipotence, even
before relativity placed a precise upper limit on velocity and before
quantum mechanics placed a precise upper limit on certainty. The natural
philosophers wished to affirm the presence and power of God in every
corner of the universe. Yet even more fervently they wished to expose the
mechanisms by which planets swerved, bodies fell, and projectiles
recoiled in the absence of any divine intervention. No wonder Descartes
appended a blanket disclaimer: “At the same time, recalling my
insignificance, I affirm nothing, but submit all these opinions to the authority
of the Catholic Church, and to the judgment of the more sage; and I wish no
one to believe anything I have written, unless he is personally persuaded by
the evidence of reason.”

The more competently science performed, the less it needed God.
There was no special providence in the fall of a sparrow; just Newton’s
second law, f = ma. Forces, masses, and acceleration were the same
everywhere. The Newtonian apple fell from its tree as mechanistically and
predictably as the moon fell around the Newtonian earth. Why does the
moon follow its curved path? Because its path is the sum of all the tiny
paths it takes in successive instants of time; and because at each instant
its forward motion is deflected, like the apple, toward the earth. God need
not choose the path. Or, having chosen once, in creating a universe with

such laws, He need not choose again. A God that does not intervene is a
God receding into a distant, harmless background.

Yet even as the eighteenth-century philosopher scientists learned to
compute the paths of planets and projectiles by Newton’s methods, a
French geometer and philosophe, Pierre-Louis Moreau de Maupertuis,
discovered a strangely magical new way of seeing such paths. In
Maupertuis’s scheme a planet’s path has a logic that cannot be seen from
the vantage point of someone merely adding and subtracting the forces at
work instant by instant. He and his successors, and especially Joseph
Louis Lagrange, showed that the paths of moving objects are always, in a
special sense, the most economical. They are the paths that minimize a
quantity called action—a quantity based on the object’s velocity, its mass,
and the space it traverses. No matter what forces are at work, a planet
somehow chooses the cheapest, the simplest, the best of all possible
paths. It is as if God—a parsimonious God—were after all leaving his
stamp.

None of which mattered to Feynman when he encountered Lagrange’s
method in the form of a computational shortcut in Introduction to
Theoretical Physics. All he knew was that he did not like it. To his friend
Welton and to the rest of the class the Lagrange formulation seemed
elegant and useful. It let them disregard many of the forces acting in a
problem and cut straight through to an answer. It served especially well in
freeing them from the right-angle coordinate geometry of the classical
reference frame required by Newton’s equations. Any reference frame
would do for the Lagrangian technique. Feynman refused to employ it. He
said he would not feel he understood the real physics of a system until he
had painstakingly isolated and calculated all the forces. The problems got
harder and harder as the class advanced through classical mechanics.
Balls rolled down inclines, spun in paraboloids—Feynman would resort to
in his
like 
ingenious computational 
tricks 
the ones he 
mathematics-team days, 
the seemingly blind, surefire
instead of 
Lagrangian method.

learned 

Feynman had first come on the principle of least action in Far
Rockaway, after a bored hour of high-school physics, when his teacher,
Abram Bader, took him aside. Bader drew a curve on the blackboard, the
roughly parabolic shape a ball would take if someone threw it up to a friend

at a second-floor window. If the time for the journey can vary, there are
infinitely many such paths, from a high, slow lob to a nearly straight, fast
trajectory. But if you know how long the journey took, the ball can have
taken only one path. Bader told Feynman to make two familiar calculations
of the ball’s energy: its kinetic energy, the energy of its motion, and its
potential energy, the energy it possesses by virtue of its presence high in a
gravitational field. Like all high-school physics students Feynman was used
to adding those energies together. An airplane, accelerating as it dives, or
a roller coaster, sliding down the gravity well, trades its potential energy for
kinetic energy: as it loses height it gains speed. On the way back up,
friction aside, the airplane or roller coaster makes the same conversion in
reverse: kinetic energy becomes potential energy again. Either way, the
total of kinetic and potential energy never changes. The total energy is
conserved.

Bader asked Feynman to consider a less intuitive quantity than the sum
of these energies: their difference. Subtracting the potential energy from
the kinetic energy was as easy as adding them. It was just a matter of
changing signs. But understanding the physical meaning was harder. Far
from being conserved, this quantity—the action, Bader said—changed
constantly. Bader had Feynman calculate it for the ball’s entire flight to the
window. And he pointed out what seemed to Feynman a miracle. At any
particular moment the action might rise or fall, but when the ball arrived at
its destination, the path it had followed would always be the path for which
the total action was least. For any other path Feynman might try drawing on
the blackboard—a straight line from the ground to the window, a higherarcing trajectory, or a trajectory that deviated however slightly from the
fated path—he would find a greater average difference between kinetic
and potential energy.

It is almost impossible for a physicist to talk about the principle of least
action without inadvertently imputing some kind of volition to the projectile.
The ball seems to choose its path. It seems to know all the possibilities in
advance. The natural philosophers started encountering similar minimum
principles throughout science. Lagrange himself offered a program for
computing planetary orbits. The behavior of billiard balls crashing against
each other seemed to minimize action. So did weights swung on a lever.
So, in a different way, did light rays bent by water or glass. Fermat, in

plucking his principle of least time from a pristine mathematical landscape,
had found the same law of nature.

Where Newton’s methods left scientists with a feeling of comprehension,
minimum principles left a sense of mystery. “This is not quite the way one
thinks in dynamics,” the physicist David Park has noted. One likes to think
that a ball or a planet or a ray of light makes its way instant by instant, not
that it follows a preordained path. From the Lagrangian point of view the
forces that pull and shape a ball’s arc into a gentle parabola serve a higher
law. Maupertuis wrote, “It is not in the little details … that we must look for
the supreme Being, but in phenomena whose universality suffers no
exception and whose simplicity lays them quite open to our sight.” The
universe wills simplicity. Newton’s laws provide the mechanics; the
principle of least action ensures grace.

The hard question remained. (In fact, it would remain, disquieting the few
physicists who continued to ponder it, until Feynman, having long since
overcome his aversion to the principle of least action, found the answer in
quantum mechanics.) Park phrased the question simply: How does the ball
know which path to choose?

Socializing the Engineer

“Let none say that the engineer is an unsociable creature who delights only
in formulae and slide rules.” So pleaded the MIT yearbook. Some
administrators and students did worry about the socialization of this
famously awkward creature. One medicine prescribed by the masters of
student life was Tea, compulsory for all freshmen. (“But after they have
conquered their initial fears and learned to balance a cup on a saucer
while conversing with the wife of a professor, compulsion is no longer
necessary.”) Students also refined their conversational skills at Bull
Session Dinners and their other social skills at an endless succession of
dances: Dormitory Dinner Dances, the Christmas Dance and the Spring
Dance, a Monte Carlo Dance featuring a roulette wheel and a Barn Dance
offering sleigh rides, dances to attract students from nearby women’s
colleges like Radcliffe and Simmons, dances accompanied by the
orchestras of Nye Mayhew and Glenn Miller, the traditional yearly Field Day

Dance after the equally traditional Glove Fight, and, in the fraternity houses
that provided the most desirable student quarters, formal dances that
persuaded even Dick Feynman to put on a tuxedo almost every week.

The fraternities at MIT, as elsewhere, strictly segregated students by
religion. Jews had a choice of just two, and Feynman joined the one called
Phi Beta Delta, on Bay State Road in Boston, in a neighborhood of town
houses just across the Charles River from campus. One did not simply
“join” a fraternity, however. One enjoyed a wooing process that began the
summer before college at local smokers and continued, in Feynman’s
case, with insistent offers of transportation and lodging that bordered on
kidnapping. Having chosen a fraternity, one instantly underwent a status
reversal, from an object of desire to an object of contempt. New pledges
endured systematic humiliation. Their fraternity brothers drove Feynman
and the other boys to an isolated spot in the Massachusetts countryside,
abandoned them beside a frozen lake, and left them to find their way
home. They submitted to wrestling matches in mud and allowed
themselves to be tied down overnight on the wooden floor of a deserted
house—though Feynman, still secretly afraid that he would be found out as
a sissy, made a surprising show of resisting his sophomore captors by
grabbing at their legs and trying to knock them over. These rites were tests
of character, after all, mixed with schoolboy sadism that colleges only
gradually learned to restrain. The hazing left many boys with emotional
bonds both to their tormentors and to their fellow victims.

Walking into the parlor floor of the Bay State Road chapter house of Phi
Beta Delta, a student could linger in the front room with its big bay windows
overlooking the street or head directly for the dining room, where Feynman
ate most of his meals for four years. The members wore jackets and ties to
dinner. They gathered in the anteroom fifteen minutes before and waited
for the bell that announced the meal. White-painted pilasters rose toward
the high ceilings. A stairway bent gracefully up four flights. Fraternity
members often leaned over the carved railing to shout down to those
below, gathered around the wooden radio console in one corner or waiting
to use the pay telephone on an alcove wall. The telephone provided an
upperclassman with one of his many opportunities to harass freshmen:
they were obliged to carry nickels for making change. They also carried
individual black notebooks for keeping a record of their failures, among

other things, to carry nickels. Feynman developed a trick of catching a
freshman nickel-less, making a mark in his black book, and then punishing
the same freshman all over again a few minutes later. The second and
third floors were given over entirely to study rooms, where students worked
in twos and threes. Only the top floor was for sleeping, in double-decker
bunks crowded together.

Compulsory Tea notwithstanding, some members argued vehemently
that other members lacked essential graces, among them the ability to
dance and the ability to invite women to accompany them to a dance. For
a while this complaint dominated the daily counsel of the thirty-odd
members of Phi Beta Delta. A generation later the ease of postwar life
made a place for words like “wonk” and “nerd” in the collegiate vocabulary.
In more class-bound and less puritanical cultures the concept flowered
even earlier. Britain had its boffins, working researchers subject to the
derision of intellectual gentlemen. At MIT in the thirties the nerd did not
exist; a penholder worn in the shirt pocket represented no particular
gaucherie; a boy could not become a figure of fun merely by studying. This
was fortunate for Feynman and others like him, socially inept, athletically
feeble, miserable in any but a science course, risking laughter every time
he pronounced an unfamiliar name, so worried about the other sex that he
trembled when he had to take the mail out past girls sitting on the stoop.
America’s future scientists and engineers, many of them rising from the
working class, valued studiousness without question. How could it be
otherwise, in the knots that gathered almost around the clock in fraternity
study rooms, filling dappled cardboard notebooks with course notes to be
handed down to generations? Even so, Phi Beta Delta perceived a
problem. There did seem to be a connection between hard studying and
failure to dance. The fraternity made a cooperative project of enlivening the
potential dull boys. Attendance at dances became mandatory for everyone
in Phi Beta Delta. For those who could not find dates, the older boys
arranged dates. In return, stronger students tutored the weak. Dick felt he
got a good bargain. Eventually he astonished even the most sociable of
his friends by spending long hours at the Raymore-Playmore Ballroom, a
huge dance hall near Boston’s Symphony Hall with a mirrored ball rotating
from the ceiling.

The best help for his social confidence, however, came from Arline

Greenbaum. She was still one of the most beautiful girls he knew, with
dimples in her round, ruddy face, and she was becoming a distinct
presence in his life, though mostly from a distance. On Saturdays she
would visit his family in Far Rockaway and give Joan piano lessons. She
was the kind of young woman that people called “talented”—musical and
artistic in a well-rounded way. She danced and sang in the Lawrence High
School revue, “America on Her Way.” The Feynmans let her paint a parrot
on the inside door of the coat closet downstairs. Joan started to think of
her as an especially benign older sister. Often after their piano lesson they
went for walks or rode their bicycles to the beach.

Arline also made an impression on the fraternity boys when she started
visiting on occasional weekends and spared Dick the necessity of finding
a date from among the students at the nearby women’s colleges or (to the
dismay of his friends) from among the waitresses at the coffee shop he
frequented. Maybe there was hope for Dick after all. Still, they wondered
whether she would succeed in domesticating him before he found his way
to the end of her patience. Over the winter break he had some of his
friends home to Far Rockaway. They went to a New Year’s Eve party in the
Bronx, taking the long subway-train ride across Brooklyn and north through
Manhattan and returning, early in the morning, by the same route. By then
Dick had decided that alcohol made him stupid. He avoided it with unusual
earnestness. His friends knew that he had drunk no wine or liquor at the
party, but all the way home he put on a loud, staggering drunk act, reeling
off the subway car doors, swinging from the overhead straps, leaning over
the seated passengers, and comically slurring nonsense at them. Arline
watched unhappily. She had made up her mind about him, however.
Sometime in his junior year he suggested that they become engaged. She
agreed. Long afterward he discovered that she considered that to have
been not his first but his second proposal of marriage—he had once said
(offhandedly, he thought) that he would like her to be his wife.

Her well-bred talents for playing the piano, singing, drawing, and
conversing about literature and the arts met in Feynman a bristling
negatively charged void. He resented art. Music of all kinds made him
edgy and uncomfortable. He felt he had a feeling for rhythm, and he had
fallen into a habit of irritating his roommates and study partners with an
absentminded drumming of his fingers, a tapping staccato against walls

and wastebaskets. But melody and harmony meant nothing to him; they
were sand in the mouth. Although psychologists liked to speculate about
the evident mental links between the gift for mathematics and the gift for
music, Feynman found music almost painful. He was becoming not
passively but aggressively uncultured. When people talked about painting
or music, he heard nomenclature and pomposity. He rejected the bird’s
nest of traditions, stories, and knowledge that cushioned most people, the
cultural resting place woven from bits of religion, American history, English
literature, Greek myth, Dutch painting, German music. He was starting
fresh. Even the gentle, hearth-centered Reform Judaism of his parents left
him cold. They had sent him to Sunday school, but he had quit, shocked at
the discovery that those stories—Queen Esther, Mordechai, the Temple,
the Maccabees, the oil that burned eight nights, the Spanish inquisition, the
Jew who sailed with Christopher Columbus, the whole pastel mosaic of
holiday legends and morality tales offered to Jewish schoolchildren on
Sundays—mixed fiction with fact. Of the books assigned by his highschool teachers he read almost none. His friends mocked him when,
forced to read a book, any book, in preparing for the New York State
Regents Examination, he chose Treasure Island. (But he outscored all of
them, even in English, when he wrote an essay on “the importance of
science in aviation” and padded his sentences with what he knew to be
redundant but authoritative phrases like “eddies, vortices, and whirlpools
formed in the atmosphere behind the aircraft …”)

He was what the Russians derided as nekulturniy, what Europeans
refused to permit in an educated scientist. Europe prepared its scholars to
register knowledge more broadly. At one of the fateful moments toward
which Feynman’s life was now beginning to speed, he would stand near
the Austrian theorist Victor Weisskopf, both men watching as a light flared
across the southern New Mexico sky. In that one instant Feynman would
see a great ball of flaming orange, churning amid black smoke, while
Weisskopf would hear, or think he heard, a Tchaikovsky waltz playing over
the radio. That was strangely banal accompaniment for a yellow-orange
sphere surrounded by a blue halo—a color that Weisskopf thought he had
seen before, on an altarpiece at Colmar painted by the medieval master
Matthias Grünewald to depict (the irony was disturbing) the ascension of
Christ. No such associations for Feynman. MIT, America’s foremost

technical school, was the best and the worst place for him. The institute
justified its required English course by reminding students that they might
someday have to write a patent application. Some of Feynman’s fraternity
friends actually liked French literature, he knew, or actually liked the lowestcommon-denominator English course, with its smattering of great books,
but to Feynman it was an intrusion and a pain in the neck.

In one course he resorted to cheating. He refused to do the daily reading
and got through a routine quiz, day after day, by looking at his neighbor’s
answers. English class to Feynman meant arbitrary rules about spelling
and grammar, the memorization of human idiosyncrasies. It seemed like
supremely useless knowledge, a parody of what knowledge ought to be.
Why didn’t the English professors just get together and straighten out the
language? Feynman got his worst grade in freshman English, barely
passing, worse than his grades in German, a language he did not succeed
in learning. After freshman year matters eased. He tried to read Goethe’s
Faust and felt he could make no sense of it. Still, with some help from his
fraternity friends he managed to write an essay on the limitations of
reason: problems in art or ethics, he argued, could not be settled with
certainty through chains of logical reasoning. Even in his class themes he
was beginning to assert a moral viewpoint. He read John Stuart Mill’s On
Liberty (“Whatever crushes individuality is despotism”) and wrote about the
despotism of social niceties, the white lies and fake politesse that he so
wanted to escape. He read Thomas Huxley’s “On a Piece of Chalk,” and
wrote, instead of the analysis he was assigned, an imitation, “On a Piece
of Dust,” musing on the ways dust makes raindrops form, buries cities, and
paints sunsets. Although MIT continued to require humanities courses, it
took a relaxed view of what might constitute humanities. Feynman’s
sophomore humanities course, for example, was Descriptive Astronomy.
“Descriptive” meant “no equations.” Meanwhile in physics itself Feynman
took two courses in mechanics (particles, rigid bodies, liquids, stresses,
heat, the laws of thermodynamics), two in electricity (electrostatics,
magnetism, …), one in experimental physics (students were expected to
design original experiments and show that they understood many different
sorts of instruments), a lecture course and a laboratory course in optics
(geometrical, physical, and physiological), a lecture course and a
laboratory course in electronics (devices, thermionics, photoemission), a

course in X rays and crystals, a course and a laboratory in atomic structure
(spectra, radioactivity, and a physicist’s view of the periodic table), a
special seminar on the new nuclear theory, Slater’s advanced theory
course, a special seminar on quantum theory, and a course on heat and
thermodynamics that worked toward statistical mechanics both classical
and quantum; and then, his docket full, he listened in on five more
advanced courses, including relativity and advanced mechanics. When he
wanted to round out his course selection with something different, he took
metallography.

Then there was philosophy. In high school he had entertained the conceit
that different kinds of knowledge come in a hierarchy: biology and
chemistry, then physics and mathematics, and then philosophy at the top.
His ladder ran from the particular and ad hoc to the abstract and
theoretical—from ants and leaves to chemicals, atoms, and equations and
then onward to God, truth, and beauty. Philosophers have entertained the
same notion. Feynman did not flirt with philosophy long, however. His
sense of what constituted a proof had already developed into something
more hard-edged than the quaint arguments he found in Descartes, for
example, whom Arline was reading. The Cartesian proof of God’s
perfection struck him as less than rigorous. When he parsed I think,
therefore I am, it came out suspiciously close to I am and I also think.
When Descartes argued that the existence of imperfection implied
perfection, and that the existence of a God concept in his own fuzzy and
imperfect mind implied the existence of a Being sufficiently perfect and
infinite as to create such a conception, Feynman thought he saw the
obvious fallacy. He knew all about imperfection in science—“degrees of
approximation.” He had drawn hyperbolic curves that approached an ideal
straight line without ever reaching it. People like Descartes were stupid,
Richard told Arline, relishing his own boldness in defying the authority of
the great names. Arline replied that she supposed there were two sides to
everything. Richard gleefully contradicted even that. He took a strip of
paper, gave it a half twist, and pasted the ends together: he had produced
a surface with one side.

No one showed Feynman, in return, the genius of Descartes’s strategy
in proving the obvious—obvious because he and his contemporaries were
supposed to take their own and God’s existence as given. The Cartesian

master plan was to reject the obvious, reject the certain, and start fresh
from a state of total doubt. Even I might be an illusion or a dream,
Descartes declared. It was the first great suspension of belief. It opened a
door to the skepticism that Feynman now savored as part of the modern
scientific method. Richard stopped reading, though, long before giving
himself the pleasure of rejecting Descartes’s final, equally unsyllogistic
argument for the existence of God: that a perfect being would certainly
have, among other excellent features, the attribute of existence.

in his 

Philosophy at MIT only irritated Feynman more. It struck him as an
industry built by incompetent logicians. Roger Bacon, famous for
introducing scientia experimentalis into philosophical thought, seemed to
have done more talking than experimenting. His idea of experiment
seemed closer to mere experience than to the measured tests a twentiethlaboratory classes. A modern
century student performed 
experimenter took hold of some physical apparatus and performed certain
actions on it, again and again, and generally wrote down numbers. William
Gilbert, a less well-known sixteenth-century investigator of magnetism,
suited Feynman better, with his credo, “In the discovery of secret things
and in the investigation of hidden causes, stronger reasons are obtained
from sure experiments and demonstrated arguments than from probable
conjectures and the opinions of philosophical speculators of the common
sort.” That was a theory of knowledge Feynman could live by. It also stuck
in his mind that Gilbert thought Bacon wrote science “like a prime
minister.” MIT’s physics instructors did nothing to encourage students to
pay attention to the philosophy instructors. The tone was set by the
pragmatic Slater, for whom philosophy was smoke and perfume, freefloating and untestable prejudice. Philosophy set knowledge adrift; physics
anchored knowledge to reality.

“Not from positions of philosophers but from the fabric of nature”—
William Harvey three centuries earlier had declared a division between
science and philosophy. Cutting up corpses gave knowledge a firmer
grounding than cutting up sentences, he announced, and the gulf between
two styles of knowledge came to be accepted by both camps. What would
happen when scientists plunged their knives into the less sinewy reality
inside the atom remained to be seen. In the meantime, although Feynman
railed against philosophy, an instructor’s cryptic comment about “stream of

consciousness” started him thinking about what he could learn of his own
mind through introspection. His inward looking was more experimental
than Descartes’s. He would go up to his room on the fourth floor of Phi
Beta Delta, pull down the shades, get into bed, and try to watch himself fall
asleep, as if he were posting an observer on his shoulder. His father years
before had raised the problem of what happens when one falls asleep. He
liked to prod Ritty to step outside himself and look afresh at his usual way
of thinking: he asked how the problem would look to a Martian who arrived
in Far Rockaway and starting asking questions. What if Martians never
slept? What would they want to know? How does it feel to fall asleep? Do
you simply turn off, as if someone had thrown a switch? Or do your ideas
come slower and slower until they stop? Up in his room, taking midday
naps for the sake of philosophy, Feynman found that he could follow his
consciousness deeper and deeper toward the dissolution that came with
sleep. His thoughts, he saw, did not so much slow down as fray apart,
snapping from place to place without the logical connectives of waking
brain work. He would suddenly realize he had been imagining his bed
rising amid a contraption of pulleys and wires, ropes winding upward and
catching against one another, Feynman thinking, the tension of the ropes
will hold … and then he would be awake again. He wrote his observations
in a class paper, concluding with a comment in the form of doggerel about
the hall-of-mirrors impossibility of true introspection: “I wonder why I wonder
why. I wonder why I wonder. I wonder why I wonder why I wonder why I
wonder!”

After his instructor read his paper aloud in class, poem and all, Feynman
began trying to watch his dreams. Even there he obeyed a tinkerer’s
impulse to take phenomena apart and look at the works inside. He was
able to dream the same dream again and again, with variations. He was
riding in a subway train. He noticed that kinesthetic feelings came through
clearly. He could feel the lurching from side to side, see colors, hear the
whoosh of air through the tunnel. As he walked through the car he passed
three girls in bathing suits behind a pane of glass like a store window. The
train kept lurching, and suddenly he thought it would be interesting to see
how sexually excited he could become. He turned to walk back toward the
window—but now the girls had become three old men playing violins. He
could influence the course of a dream, but not perfectly, he realized. In

another dream Arline came by subway train to visit him in Boston. They
met and Dick felt a wave of happiness. There was green grass, the sun
was shining, they walked along, and Arline said, “Could we be dreaming?”
“No, sir,” Dick replied, “no, this is not a dream.” He persuaded himself of
Arline’s presence so forcibly that when he awoke, hearing the noise of the
boys around him, he did not know where he was. A dismayed, disoriented
moment passed before he realized that he had been dreaming after all,
that he was in his fraternity bedroom and that Arline was back home in
New York.

intriguingly complex machine, one whose 

The new Freudian view of dreams as a door to a person’s inner life had
no place in his program. If his subconscious wished to play out desires too
frightening or confusing for his ego to contemplate directly, that hardly
mattered to Feynman. Nor did he care to think of his dream subjects as
symbols, encoded for the sake of a self-protective obscurity. It was his
ego, his “rational mind,” that concerned him. He was investigating his mind
as an 
tendencies and
capabilities mattered to him more than almost anything else. He did
develop a rudimentary theory of dreams for his philosophy essay, though it
was more a theory of vision: that the brain has an “interpretation
department” to turn jumbled sensory impressions into familiar objects and
concepts; that the people or trees we think we see are actually created by
the interpretation department from the splotches of color that enter the eye;
and that dreams are the product of the interpretation department running
wild, free of the sights and sounds of the waking hours.

His philosophical efforts at introspection did nothing to soften his dislike
of the philosophy taught at MIT as The Making of the Modern Mind. Not
enough sure experiments and demonstrated arguments; too many
probable conjectures and philosophical speculations. He sat through
lectures twirling a small steel drill bit against the sole of his shoe. So much
stuff in there, so much nonsense, he thought. Better I should use my
modern mind.

The Newest Physics

The theory of the fast and the theory of the small were narrowing the focus

of the few dozen men with the suasion to say what physics was. Most of
human experience passed in the vast reality that was neither fast nor small,
where relativity and quantum mechanics seemed unnecessary and
unnatural, where rivers ran, clouds flowed, baseballs soared and spun by
classical means—but to young scientists seeking the most fundamental
knowledge about the fabric of their universe, classical physics had no
more to say. They could not ignore the deliberately disorienting rhetoric of
the quantum mechanicians, nor the unifying poetry of Einstein’s teacher
Hermann Minkowski: “Space of itself and time of itself will sink into mere
shadows, and only a kind of union between them shall survive.”

Later, quantum mechanics suffused into the lay culture as a mystical fog.
It was uncertainty, it was acausality, it was the Tao updated, it was the
century’s richest fount of paradoxes, it was the permeable membrane
between the observer and the observed, it was the funny business sending
shudders up science’s all-too-deterministic scaffolding. For now, however,
it was merely a necessary and useful contrivance for accurately describing
the behavior of nature at the tiny scales now accessible to experimenters.
Nature had seemed so continuous. Technology, however, made
discreteness and discontinuity a part of everyday experience: gears and
ratchets creating movement in tiny jumps; telegraphs that digitized
information in dashes and dots. What about the light emitted by matter? At
everyday temperatures the light is infrared, its wavelengths too long to be
visible to the eye. At higher temperatures, matter radiates at shorter
wavelengths: thus an iron bar heated in a forge glows red, yellow, and
white. By the turn of the century, scientists were struggling to explain this
relationship between temperature and wavelength. If heat was to be
understood as the motion of molecules, perhaps this precisely tuned
radiant energy suggested an internal oscillation, a vibration with the
resonant tonality of a violin string. The German physicist Max Planck
pursued this idea to its logical conclusion and announced in 1900 that it
required an awkward adjustment to the conventional way of thinking about
energy. His equations produced the desired results only if one supposed
that radiation was emitted in lumps, discrete packets called quanta. He
calculated a new constant of nature, the indivisible unit underlying these
lumps. It was a unit, not of energy, but of the product of energy and time—
the quantity called action.

Five years later Einstein used Planck’s constant to explain another
puzzle, the photoelectric effect, in which light absorbed by a metal knocks
electrons free and creates an electric current. He, too, followed the
relationship between wavelength and current to an inevitable mathematical
conclusion: that light itself behaves not as a continuous wave but as a
broken succession of lumps when it interacts with electrons.

These were dubious claims. Most physicists found Einstein’s theory of
special relativity, published the same year, more palatable. But in 1913
Niels Bohr, a young Dane working in Ernest Rutherford’s laboratory in
Manchester, England, proposed a new model of the atom built on these
quantum underpinnings. Rutherford had recently imagined the atom as a
solar system in miniature, with electrons orbiting the nucleus. Without a
quantum theory, physicists would have to accept the notion of electrons
gradually spiraling inward as they radiated some of their energy away. The
result would be continuous radiation and the eventual collapse of the atom
in on itself. Bohr instead described an atom whose electrons could inhabit
only certain orbits, prescribed by Planck’s indivisible constant. When an
electron absorbed a light quantum, it meant that in that instant it jumped to
a higher orbit: the soon-to-be-proverbial quantum jump. When the electron
jumped to a lower orbit, it emitted a light quantum at a certain frequency.
Everything else was simply forbidden. What happened to the electron
“between” orbits? One learned not to ask.

These new kinds of lumpiness in the way science conceived of energy
were the essence of quantum mechanics. It remained to create a theory, a
mathematical framework that would accommodate the working out of
these ideas. Classical intuitions had to be abandoned. New meanings had
to be assigned to the notions of probability and cause. Much later, when
most of the early quantum physicists were already dead, Dirac, himself
chalky-haired and gaunt, with just a trace of white mustache, made the birth
of quantum mechanics into a small fable. By then many scientists and
writers had done so, but rarely with such unabashed stick-figure simplicity.
There were heroes and almost heroes, those who reached the brink of
discovery and those whose courage and faith in the equation led them to
plunge onward.

Dirac’s simple morality play began with LORENTZ. This Dutch physicist
realized that light shines from the oscillating charges within the atom, and

he found a way of rearranging the algebra of space and time that produced
a strange contraction of matter near the speed of light. As Dirac said,
“Lorentz succeeded in getting correctly all the basic equations needed to
establish the relativity of space and time, but he just was not able to make
the final step.” Fear held him back.

Next came a bolder man, EINSTEIN. He was not so inhibited. He was

able to move ahead and declare space and time to be joined.

HEISENBERG started quantum mechanics with “a brilliant idea”: “one
should try to construct a theory in terms of quantities which are provided by
experiment, rather than building it up, as people had done previously, from
an atomic model which involved many quantities which could not be
observed.” This amounted to a new philosophy, Dirac said.

(Conspicuously a noncharacter in Dirac’s fable was Bohr, whose 1913
model of the hydrogen atom now represented the old philosophy. Electrons
whirling about a nucleus? Heisenberg wrote privately that this made no
sense: “My whole effort is to destroy without a trace the idea of orbits.” One
could observe light of different frequencies shining from within the atom.
One could not observe electrons circling in miniature planetary orbits, nor
any other atomic structure.)

It was 1925. Heisenberg set out to pursue his conception wherever it
might lead, and it led to an idea so foreign and surprising that “he was
really scared.” It seemed that Heisenberg’s quantities, numbers arranged
in matrices, violated the usual commutative law of multiplication that says a
times b equals b times a. Heisenberg’s quantities did not commute. There
were consequences. Equations in this form could not specify both
momentum and position with definite precision. A measure of uncertainty
had to be built in.

A manuscript of Heisenberg’s paper made its way to DIRAC himself. He
studied it. “You see,” he said, “I had an advantage over Heisenberg
because I did not have his fears.”

Meanwhile, SCHRÖDINGER was taking a different route. He had been
struck by an idea of DE BROGLIE two years before: that electrons, those
pointlike carriers of electric charge, are neither particles nor waves but a
mysterious combination. Schrödinger set out to make a wave equation, “a
very neat and beautiful equation,” that would allow one to calculate
electrons tugged by fields, as they are in atoms.

Then he tested his equation by calculating the spectrum of light emitted
by a hydrogen atom. The result: failure. Theory and experiment did not
agree. Eventually, however, he found that if he compromised and ignored
the effects of relativity his theory agreed more closely with observations.
He published this less ambitious version of his equation.

Thus fear triumphed again. “Schrödinger had been too timid,” Dirac
said. Two other men, KLEIN and GORDON, rediscovered the more complete
version of the theory and published it. Because they were “sufficiently bold”
not to worry too much about experiment, the first relativistic wave equation
now bears their names.

Yet 

the Klein-Gordon equation still produced mismatches with
experiments when calculations were carried out carefully. It also had what
seemed to Dirac a painful logical flaw. It implied that the probability of
certain events must be negative, less than zero. Negative probabilities,
Dirac said, “are of course quite absurd.”

It remained only for Dirac to invent—or was it “design” or “discover”?—a
new equation for the electron. This was exceedingly beautiful in its formal
simplicity and the sense of inevitability it conveyed, after the fact, to
sensitive physicists. The equation was a triumph. It correctly predicted (and
so, to a physicist, “explained”) the newly discovered quantity called spin, as
well as the hydrogen spectrum. For the rest of his life Dirac’s equation
remained his signal achievement. It was 1927. “That is the way in which
quantum mechanics was started,” Dirac said.

These were the years of Knabenphysik, boy physics. When they began,
Heisenberg was twenty-three and Dirac twenty-two. (Schrödinger was an
elderly thirty-seven, but, as one chronicler noted, his discoveries came
“during a late erotic outburst in his life.”) A new Knabenphysik began at
MIT in the spring of 1936. Dick Feynman and T. A. Welton were hungry to
make their way into quantum theory, but no course existed in this nascent
science, so much more obscure even than relativity. With guidance from
just a few texts they embarked on a program of self-study. Their
collaboration began in one of the upstairs study rooms of the Bay State
Road fraternity house and continued past the end of the spring term.
Feynman returned home to Far Rockaway, Welton to Saratoga Springs.
They filled a notebook, mailing it back and forth, and in a period of months
they recapitulated nearly the full sweep of the 1925–27 revolution.

“Dear R. P… .” Welton wrote on July 23. “I notice you write your

equation:

the 

This was 
relativistic Klein-Gordon equation. Feynman had
rediscovered it, by correctly taking into account the tendency of matter to
grow more massive at velocities approaching the speed of light—not just
quantum mechanics, but relativistic quantum mechanics. Welton was
excited. “Why don’t you apply your equation to a problem like the hydrogen
atom, and see what results it gives?” Just as Schrödinger had done ten
years before, they worked out the calculation and saw that it was wrong, at
least when it came to making precise predictions.

“Here’s something, the problem of an electron in the gravitational field of
a heavy particle. Of course the electron would contribute something to the
field …”

“I wonder if the energy would be quantized? The more I think about the

problem, the more interesting it sounds. I’m going to try it …

“… I’ll probably get an equation that I can’t solve anyway,” Welton added
ruefully. (When Feynman got his turn at the notebook he scrawled in the
margin, “Right!”) “That’s the trouble with quantum mechanics. It’s easy
enough to set up equations for various problems, but it takes a mind twice
as good as the differential analyzer to solve them.”

General relativity, barely a decade old, had merged gravity and space
into a single object. Gravity was a curvature of space-time. Welton wanted
more. Why not tie electromagnetism to space-time geometry as well?
“Now you see what I mean when I say, I want to make electrical
phenomena a result of the metric of a space in the same way that
gravitational phenomena are. I wonder if your equation couldn’t be
extended to Eddington’s affine geometry…” (In response Feynman
scribbled: “I tried it. No luck yet.”)

Feynman also tried to invent an operator calculus, writing rules of
differentiation and integration for quantities that did not commute. The rules
would have to depend on the order of the quantities, themselves matrix
representations of forces in space and time. “Now I think I’m wrong on
account of those darn partial integrations,” Feynman wrote. “I oscillate

between right and wrong.”

“Now I know I’m right … In my theory there are a lot more ‘fundamental’

invariants than in the other theory.”

And on they went. “Hot dog! after 3 wks of work … I have at last found a
simple proof,” Feynman wrote. “It’s not important to write it, however. The
only reason I wanted to do it was because I couldn’t do it and felt that there
were some more relations between the An & their derivatives that I had not
discovered … Maybe I’ll get electricity into the metric yet! Good night, I
have to go to bed.”

The equations came fast, penciled across the notebook pages.
Sometimes Feynman called them “laws.” As he worked to improve his
techniques for calculating, he also kept asking himself what was
fundamental and what was secondary, which were the essential laws and
which were derivative. In the upside-down world of early quantum
mechanics, it was far from obvious. Heisenberg and Schrödinger had
taken starkly different routes to the same physics. Each in his way had
embraced abstraction and renounced visualization. Even Schrödinger’s
waves defied every conventional picture. They were not waves of
substance or energy but of a kind of probability, rolling through a
mathematical space. This space itself often resembled the space of
classical physics, with coordinates specifying an electron’s position, but
physicists found it more convenient to use momentum space (denoted by
Pα), a coordinate system based on momentum rather than position—or
based on the direction of a wavefront rather than any particular point on it.
In quantum mechanics the uncertainty principle meant that position and
momentum could no longer be specified simultaneously. Feynman in the
August after his sophomore year began working with coordinate space
(Qα)—less convenient for the wave point of view, but more directly
visualizable.

“Pα is no more fundamental than Qα nor vice versa—why then has Pα
played such an important role in theory and why don’t I try Qα instead of Pα
in certain generalizations of equations …” Indeed, he proved that the
customary approach could be derived directly from the theory as cast in
terms of momentum space.

In the background both boys were worrying about their health. Welton
had an embarrassing and unexplained tendency to fall asleep in his chair,

and during the summer break he was taking naps, mineral baths, and
sunlamp treatments—doses of high ultraviolet radiation from a large
mercury arc light. Feynman suffered something like nervous exhaustion as
he finished his sophomore year. At first he was told he would have to stay
in bed all summer. “I’d go nuts if it were me I,” T. A. wrote in their notebook.
“Anyhow, I hope you get to school all right in the fall. Remember, we’re
going to be taught quantum mechanics by no less an authority than Prof.
Morse himself. I’m really looking forward to that.” (“Me too,” Feynman
wrote.)

They were desperately eager to be at the front edge of physics. They
both started reading journals like the Physical Review. (Feynman made a
mental note that a surprising number of articles seemed to be coming from
Princeton.) Their hope was to catch up on the latest discoveries and to
jump ahead. Welton would set to work on a development in wave tensor
calculus; Feynman would tackle an esoteric application of tensors to
electrical engineering, and only after wasting several months did they
begin to realize that the journals made poor Baedekers. Much of the work
was out of date by the time the journal article appeared. Much of it was
mere translation of a routine result into an alternative jargon. News did
sometimes break in the Physical Review, if belatedly, but the sophomores
were ill equipped to pick it out of the mostly inconsequential background.

Morse had taught the second half of the theoretical physics course that
brought Feynman and Welton together, and he had noticed these
sophomores, with their penetrating questions about quantum mechanics. In
the fall of 1937 they, along with an older student, met with Morse once a
week and began to fit their own blind discoveries into the context of
physics as physicists understood it. They finally read Dirac’s 1935 bible,
The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Morse put them to work
calculating the properties of different atoms, using a method of his own
devising. It computed energies by varying the parameters in equations
known as hydrogenic radial functions—Feynman insisted on calling them
hygienic functions—and it required more plain, plodding arithmetic than
either boy had ever encountered. Fortunately they had calculators, a new
kind that replaced the old hand cranks with electric motors. Not only could
the calculators add, multiply, and subtract; they could divide, though it took
time. They would enter numbers by turning metal dials. They would turn on

the motor and watch the dials spin toward zero. A bell would ring. The
chug-chug-ding-ding rang in their ears for hours.

through a Depression agency, 

In their spare time Feynman and Welton used the same machines to
earn money 
the National Youth
Administration, calculating the atomic lattices of crystals for a professor
who wanted to publish reference tables. They worked out faster methods of
running the calculator. And when they thought that they had their system
perfected, they made another calculation: how long it would take to
complete the job. The answer: seven years. They persuaded the professor
to set the project aside.

Shop Men

MIT was still an engineering school, and an engineering school in the
heyday of mechanical ingenuity. There seemed no limit to the power of
lathes and cams, motors and magnets, though just a half-generation later
the onset of electronic miniaturization would show that there had been
limits after all. The school’s laboratories, technical classes, and machine
shops gave undergraduates a playground like none other in the world.
When Feynman took a laboratory course, the instructor was Harold
Edgerton, an inventor and tinkerer who soon became famous for his highspeed photographs, made with a stroboscope, a burst of light slicing time
more finely than any mechanical shutter could. Edgerton extended human
sight into the realm of the very fast just as microscopes and telescopes
were bringing into view the small and the large. In his MIT workshop he
made pictures of bullets splitting apples and cards; of flying hummingbirds
and splashing milk drops; of golf balls at the moment of impact, deformed
to an ovoid shape that the eye had never witnessed. The stroboscope
showed how much had been unseen. “All I’ve done is take God Almighty’s
lighting and put it in a container,” he said. Edgerton and his colleagues
gave body to the ideal of the scientist as a permanent child, finding ever
more ingenious ways of taking the world apart to see what was inside.

That was an American technical education. In Germany a young wouldbe theorist could spend his days hiking around alpine lakes in small
groups, playing chamber music and arguing philosophy with an earnest

Magic Mountain volubility. Heisenberg, whose name would come to stand
for the twentieth century’s most famous kind of uncertainty, grew
enraptured as a young student with his own “utter certainty” that nature
expressed a deep Platonic order. The strains of Bach’s D Minor
Chaconne, the moonlit landscapes visible through the mists, the atom’s
hidden structure in space and time—all seemed as one. Heisenberg had
joined the youth movement that formed in Munich after the trauma of World
War I, and the conversation roamed freely: Did the fate of Germany matter
“more than that of all mankind”? Can human perception ever penetrate the
atom deeply enough to see why a carbon atom bonds with two but never
three oxygen atoms? Does youth have “the right to fashion life according to
its own values”? For such students philosophy came first in physics. The
search for meaning, the search for purpose, led naturally down into the
world of atoms.

Students entering the laboratories and machine shops at MIT left the
search for meaning outside. Boys tested their manhood there, learning to
handle the lathes and talk with the muscular authority that seemed to
emanate from the “shop men.” Feynman wanted to be a shop man but felt
he was a faker among these experts, so easy with their tools and their
working-class talk, their ties tucked in their belts to avoid catching in the
chuck. When Feynman tried to machine metal it never came out quite right.
His disks were not quite flat. His holes were too big. His wheels wobbled.
Yet he understood these gadgets and he savored small triumphs. Once a
machinist who had often teased him was struggling to center a heavy disk
of brass in his lathe. He had it spinning against a position gauge, with a
needle that jerked with each revolution of the off-kilter disk. The machinist
could not see how to center the disk and stop the tick-tick-tick of the
needle. He was trying to mark the point where the disk stuck out farthest by
lowering a piece of chalk as slowly as he could toward the spinning edge.
The lopsidedness was too subtle; it was impossible to hold the chalk
steady enough to hit just the right spot. Feynman had an idea. He took the
chalk and held it lightly above the disk, gently shaking his hand up and
down in time with the rhythm of the shaking needle. The bulge of the disk
was invisible, but the rhythm wasn’t. He had to ask the machinist which way
the needle went when the bulge was up, but he got the timing just right. He
watched the needle, said to himself, rhythm, and made his mark. With a

tap of the machinist’s mallet on Feynman’s mark, the disk was centered.

The machinery of experimental physics was just beginning to move
beyond the capabilities of a few men in a shop. In Rome, as the 1930s
began, Enrico Fermi made his own tiny radiation counters from lipsticksize aluminum tubes at his institute above the Via Panisperna. He
methodically brought one element after another into contact with free
neutrons streaming from samples of radioactive radon. By his hands were
created a succession of new radioactive isotopes, substances never seen
in nature, some with half-lives so short that Fermi had to race his samples
down the corridor to test them before they decayed to immeasurability. He
found a nameless new element heavier than any found in nature. By hand
he placed lead barriers across the neutron stream, and then, in a moment
of mysterious inspiration, he tried a barrier of paraffin. Something in
paraffin—hydrogen?—seemed to slow the neutrons. Unexpectedly, the
slow neutrons had a far more powerful effect on some of the bombarded
elements. Because the neutrons were electrically neutral, they floated
transparently through the knots of electric charge around the target atoms.
At speeds barely faster than a batted baseball they had more time to work
nuclear havoc. As Fermi tried to understand this, it seemed to him that the
essence of the process was a kind of diffusion, analogous to the slow
invasion of the still air of a room by the scent of perfume. He imagined the
path they must be taking through the paraffin, colliding one, two, three, a
hundred times with atoms of hydrogen, losing energy with each collision,
bouncing this way and that according to laws of probability.

The neutron, the chargeless particle in the atom’s core, had not even
been discovered until 1932. Until then physicists supposed that the nucleus
was a mixture of electrically negative and positive particles, electrons and
protons. The evidence taken from ordinary chemical and electrical
experiments shed little light on the nucleus. Physicists knew only that this
core contained nearly all the atom’s mass and whatever positive charge
was needed to balance the outer electrons. It was the electrons—floating
or whirling in their shells, orbits, or clouds—that seemed to matter in
chemistry. Only by bombarding substances with particles and measuring
the particles’ deflection could scientists begin to penetrate the nucleus.
They also began to split it. By the spring of 1938 not just dozens but
hundreds of physics professors and students were at least glancingly

aware of the ideas leading toward the creation of heavy new elements and
the potential release of nuclear energies. MIT decided to offer a graduate
seminar on the theory of nuclear structure, to be taught by Morse and a
colleague.

Feynman and Welton, juniors, showed up in a room of excited-looking
graduate students. When Morse saw them he demanded to know whether
they were planning to register. Feynman was afraid they would be turned
down, but when he said yes, Morse said he was relieved. Feynman and
Welton brought the total enrollment to three. The other graduate students
were willing only to audit the class. Like quantum mechanics, this was
difficult new territory. No textbook existed. There was just one essential text
for anyone studying nuclear physics in 1938: a series of three long articles
in Reviews of Modern Physics by Hans Bethe, a young German physicist
newly relocated to Cornell. In these papers Bethe effectively rebuilt this
new discipline. He began with the basics of charge, weight, energy, size,
and spin of the simplest nuclear particles. He moved on to the simplest
compound nucleus, the deuteron, a single proton bound to a single
neutron. He systematically worked his way toward the forces that were
beginning to reveal themselves in the heaviest atoms known.

As he studied these most modern branches of physics, Feynman also
looked for chances to explore more classical problems, problems he could
visualize. He investigated the scattering of sunlight by clouds—scattering
being a word that was taking a more and more central place in the
vocabulary of physicists. Like so many scientific borrowings from plain
English, the word came deceptively close to its ordinary meaning.
Particles in the atmosphere scatter rays of light almost in the way a
gardener scatters seeds or the ocean scatters driftwood. Before the
quantum era a physicist could use the word without having to commit
himself mentally either to a wave or a particle view of the phenomenon.
Light simply dispersed as it passed through some medium and so lost
some or all of its directional character. The scattering of waves implied a
general diffusion, a randomizing of the original directionality. The sky is
blue because the molecules of the atmosphere scatter the blue
wavelengths more than the others; the blue seems to come from
everywhere in the sky. The scattering of particles encouraged a more
precise visualization: actual billiard-ball collisions and recoils. A single

particle could scatter another. Indeed, the scattering of a very few particles
would soon become the salient experiment of modern physics.

That clouds scattered sunlight was obvious. Close up, each wavering
water droplet must shimmer with light both reflected and refracted, and the
passage of the light from one drop to the next must be another kind of
diffusion. A well-organized education in science fosters the illusion that
when problems are easy to state and set up mathematically they are then
easy to solve. For Feynman the cloud-scattering problem helped disperse
the illusion. It seemed as primitive as any of hundreds of problems set out
in his textbooks. It had the childlike quality that marks so many fundamental
questions. It came just one step past the question of why we see clouds at
all: water molecules scatter light perfectly well when they are floating as
vapor, yet the light grows much whiter and more intense when the vapor
condenses, because the molecules come so close together that their tiny
electric fields can resonate in phase with one another to multiply the effect.
Feynman tried to understand also what happened to the direction of the
scattered light, and he discovered something that he could not believe at
first. When the light emerges from the cloud again, caroming off billions of
droplets, seemingly smeared to a ubiquitous gray, it actually retains some
memory of its original direction. One foggy day he looked at a building far
away across the river in Boston and saw its outline, faint but still sharp,
diminished in contrast but not in focus. He thought: the mathematics
worked after all.

Feynman of Course Is Jewish

Feynman’s probing reached the edge of known science. His scattering
calculations had immediate application to a problem that was troubling
one of his professors, Manuel S. Vallarta, concerning cosmic rays. These
had become a major issue. Not just specialists but also the public worried
about these unknown rays of unknown origin, streaming through space at
high energies and entering the atmosphere, where they left trails of electric
charge. This ionization first gave their presence away. It occurred to
scientists just before the turn of the century that the atmosphere, left alone,
ought not to conduct electricity. Now scientists were sending forth ray-

detecting equipment on ships, aircraft, and balloons all around the globe,
but especially in the neighborhood of Pasadena, California, where Robert
Millikan and Carl Anderson had made the California Institute of Technology
the nation’s focal point of cosmic ray research. Later it began to become
clear that the term was a catchall for a variety of particles with different
sources. In the thirties the detective work meant trying to understand which
of the universe’s constituents might emit them and which might influence
their timing and direction as seen from earth. At MIT Vallarta was puzzling
over how cosmic rays might be scattered by the magnetic fields of the
galaxy’s stars, just as cloud droplets scatter sunlight. Whether cosmic rays
came from inside or outside the galaxy, should the scattering effect bias
their apparent direction toward or away from the main body of the Milky
Way? Feynman’s work produced a negative answer: neither. The net effect
of the scattering was zero. If cosmic rays seemed to come from all
directions, it was not because the stars’ interference disguised their
original orientation. They wrote this up together for publication as a letter to
the Physical Review—Feynman’s first published work. Unrevolutionary
though the item was, its reasoning turned on a provocative and clever idea:
that the probability of a particle’s emerging from a clump of scattering
matter in a certain direction must be equivalent to the probability of an
antiparticle’s taking the reverse path. From the antiparticle’s point of view,
time was running backward.

Vallarta let his student in on a secret of mentor-protégé publishing: the
senior scientist’s name comes first. Feynman had his revenge a few years
later, when Heisenberg concluded an entire book on cosmic rays with the
phrase, “such an effect is not to be expected according to Vallarta and
Feynman.” When they next met, Feynman asked gleefully whether Vallarta
had seen Heisenberg’s book. Vallarta knew why Feynman was grinning.
“Yes,” he replied. “You’re the last word in cosmic rays.”

Feynman had developed an appetite for new problems—any problems.
He would stop people he knew in the corridor of the physics building and
ask what they were working on. They quickly discovered that the question
was not the usual small talk. Feynman pushed for details. He caught one
classmate, Monarch Cutler, in despair. Cutler had taken on a senior thesis
problem based on an important discovery in 1938 by two professors in the
optics laboratory. They found that they could transform the refracting and

reflecting qualities of lenses by evaporating salts onto them, forming very
thin coatings, just a few atoms thick. Such coatings became essential to
reducing unwanted glare in the lenses of cameras and telescopes. Cutler
was supposed to find a way of calculating what happened when different
thin films were applied, one atop another. His professors wondered, for
example, whether there was a way to make exceedingly pure color filters,
passing only light of a certain wavelength. Cutler was stymied. Classical
optics should have sufficed—no peculiarly quantum effects came into play
—but no one had ever analyzed the behavior of light passing through a
parade of mostly transparent films thinner than a single wavelength. Cutler
told Feynman he could find no literature on the subject. He did not know
where to start. A few days later Feynman returned with the solution: a
formula summing an infinite series of reflections back and forth from the
inner surfaces of the coatings. He showed how the combinations of
refraction and reflection would affect the phase of the light, changing its
color. Using Feynman’s theory and many hours on the Marchant calculator,
Cutler also found a way to make the color filters his professors wanted.

Developing a theory for reflection by multiple-layer thin films was not so
different for Feynman from math team in the now-distant past of Far
Rockaway. He could see, or feel, the intertwined infinities of the problem,
the beam of light resonating back and forth between the pair of surfaces,
and then the next pair, and so on, and he had a giant mental kit bag of
formulas to try out. Even when he was fourteen he had manipulated series
of continued fractions the way a pianist practices scales. Now he had an
intuition for the translating of formulas into physics and back, a feeling for
the rhythms or the spaces or the forces that a given set of symbols implied.
In his senior year the mathematics department asked him to join a team of
three entrants to the nation’s most difficult and prestigious mathematics
contest, the Putnam competition, then in its second year. (The top five
finishers are named as Putnam Fellows and one receives a scholarship at
Harvard.) The problems were intricate exercises in calculus and algebraic
manipulation; no one was expected to complete them all satisfactorily in
the allotted time. In some years the median has been zero—more than half
the entrants fail to solve a single problem. One of Feynman’s fraternity
brothers was surprised to see him return home while the examination was
still going on. Feynman learned later that the scorers had been astounded

by the gap between his result and the next four. Harvard sounded him out
about the scholarship, but he told them he had already decided to go
elsewhere: to Princeton.

His first thought had been to remain at MIT. He believed that no other
American institution rivaled it and he said so to his department chairman.
Slater had heard this before from loyal students whose provincial world
contained nothing but Boston and the Tech, or the Bronx and the Tech, or
Flatbush and the Tech. He told Feynman flatly that he would not be allowed
back as a graduate student—for his own good.

Slater and Morse communicated directly with their colleagues at
Princeton in January 1939, signaling that Feynman was something special.
One said his record was “practically perfect,” the other that he had been
“the best undergraduate student we have had in the Physics Department
for five years at least.” At Princeton, when Feynman’s name came up in the
deliberations of the graduate admissions committee, the phrase “diamond
in the rough” kept materializing out of the wash of conversation. The
committee had seen its share of one-sided applicants but had never
before admitted a student with such low scores in history and English on
the Graduate Record Examination. Feynman’s history score was in the
bottom fifth, his literature score in the bottom sixth; and 93 percent of those
who took the test had given better answers about fine arts. His physics and
mathematics scores were the best the committee had seen. In fact the
physics score was perfect.

Princeton had another problem with Feynman, as the head of its
department, H. D. Smyth, made clear to Morse. “One question always
arises, particularly with men interested in theoretical physics,” Smyth wrote.

Is Feynman Jewish? We have no definite rule against Jews but
have to keep their proportion in our department reasonably small
because of the difficulty of placing them.

By March no word had come and Slater was concerned enough to write
Smyth again, collegially: “Dear Harry … definitely the best undergraduate
we have had for a number of years … first-rate both in matters of
scholarship and personality …” The recommendation was formal and
conventional, but in a handwritten postscript that would not appear on the

carbon copies Slater got to the point: “Feynman of course is Jewish …” He
wanted to assure Smyth there were mitigating circumstances:

… but as compared for instance with Kanner and Eisenbud he is
more attractive personally by several orders of magnitude. We’re not
trying to get rid of him—we want to keep him, and privately hope you
won’t give him anything. But he apparently has decided to go to
Princeton. I guarantee you’ll like him if he does.

Morse, too, reported that Feynman’s “physiognomy and manner, however,
show no trace of this characteristic and I do not believe the matter will be
any great handicap.”

On the eve of the Second World War institutional anti-Semitism
remained a barrier in American science, and a higher barrier for graduate
schools than colleges. At universities a graduate student, unlike an
undergraduate, was as much hired as admitted to a department; he would
be paid for teaching and research and would be on a track for promotion.
Furthermore, graduate departments considered themselves responsible to
the industries they fed, and the industrial companies that conducted most
research in the applied sciences were largely closed to Jews. “We know
perfectly well that names ending in ‘berg’ or ‘stein’ have to be skipped,” the
chairman of Harvard’s chemistry department, whose name was Albert
Sprague Coolidge, said in 1946. Admissions quotas had been imposed
broadly in the twenties and thirties, with immigrant children seeking
admission to college in greater numbers. The case against Jews rarely
had to be articulated. It was understood that their striving, their pushiness,
smelled of the tenement. It was unseemly. “They took obvious pride in their
academic success… . We despised the industry of those little Jews,” a
Harvard Protestant wrote in 1920. Thomas Wolfe, himself despising the
ambition of “the Jew boy,” nevertheless understood the attraction of the
scientific career: “Because, brother, he is burning in the night. He sees the
class, the lecture room, the shining apparatus of gigantic laboratories, the
open field of scholarship and pure research, certain knowledge and the
world distinction of an Einstein name.” It was also understood that a
professor needed a certain demeanor to work well with students; that Jews
were often soft-spoken and diffident or, contradictorily, so brilliant as to be

In 

insensitive. 

impatient and 
the close, homogenous university
communities, code words were attractive or nice. Even the longtime
chairman of J. Robert Oppenheimer’s department at the University of
California at Berkeley, Raymond T. Birge, was quoted as saying of
Oppenheimer, “New York Jews flocked out here to him, and some were
not as nice as he was.”

Feynman, as a New York Jew distinctly uninterested in either the faith or
the sociology of Judaism, did not give voice to any awareness of antiSemitism. Princeton did accept him, and from then on he never had
occasion to worry about the contingencies of academic hiring. Still, when
he was at MIT, the Bell Telephone Laboratories turned him down for
summer jobs year after year, despite recommendations by William
Shockley, Bell’s future Nobel laureate. Bell was an institution that hired
virtually no Jewish scientists before the war. Birge himself eventually had
an opportunity to hire Feynman for Berkeley: a frustrated Oppenheimer
was recommending him urgently, but Birge put off a decision for two years,
until it was too late. In the first case anti-Semitism may have played the
deciding role; in the second case perhaps a smaller role. If Feynman ever
suspected that his religion might have shifted the path of his career, he
declined to say so.

Forces in Molecules

Thirteen physics majors completed senior theses in 1939. The world of
accumulated knowledge was still small enough that MIT could expect a
thesis to represent original and possibly publishable work. The thesis
should begin the scientist’s normal career and meanwhile supply missing
blocks in the wall of organized knowledge, by analyzing such minutiae as
the spectra of singly ionized gadolinium or hydrated manganese chloride
crystals. (Identifying the telltale combinations of wavelengths emitted by
such substances still required patience and good experimental technique,
and science seemed to be engendering new substances as fast as
spectroscopists could analyze them.) Seniors could devise new laboratory
instruments or investigate crystals that produced electrical currents when
squeezed. Feynman’s thesis began as a circumscribed problem like

these. It ended as a fundamental discovery about the forces acting within
the molecules of any substance. If it bore little connection to his greater
work that followed—and Feynman himself dismissed it as an obvious
result that he should have written in “half a line”—it nevertheless found its
way into the permanent tool kit of the physics of solids.

Although he did not know it, his quantum-mechanics professor, Morse,
had recommended in his junior year that the department graduate him a
year early. The suggestion was turned down, and Slater himself became
Feynman’s thesis adviser. Slater proposed a problem that at first seemed
not much deeper than most senior theses. The question could almost have
come from a physics and chemistry handbook: Why does quartz expand
so little when heated? Compared to metals, for example, why is its
coefficient of expansion so small? Any substance expands because heat
agitates its molecules—heat is the agitation of its molecules—but in a
solid the details of the expansion depend on the actual molecular layout. A
crystal, with its molecules in a regular geometrical array, can expand more
along one axis than another. Typically scientists would represent a
crystalline structure with a Tinkertoy model, balls stuck on rods, but real
matter is not so rigid. Atoms may be more or less locked in an array, or
they may swing or float more or less freely from one place to another.
Electrons in a metal will swarm freely about. The color, the texture, the
rigidity, the frangibility, the conductivity, the softness, the taste of a
substance all depend on the local habits of atoms. Those habits in turn
depend on the forces at work within a substance—forces both classical
and quantum mechanical—and when Feynman began his thesis work
those forces were not well understood, even in quartz, the most common
mineral on earth.

An old-fashioned steam engine was regulated by a mechanical
governor: a pair of iron balls swinging outward from a spinning shaft. The
faster it spun, the farther outward they would swing. But the farther they
would swing, the harder they would make it to spin the shaft. Feynman
started by imagining some analogous effect in the atoms of quartz, silicon
dioxide, a pair of oxygen atoms clinging to each atom of silicon. Instead of
spinning, the silicon atoms were vibrating; as the quartz grew warmer, he
thought that the oxygen atoms might provide a mechanical force that would
pull inward against the increasing agitation of the molecules, thus

compensating somehow for the ordinary expansion. But how could the
forces within each molecule—forces that varied in different directions—be
calculated? No straightforward method seemed to exist.

He had never thought about molecular structure in such detail before. He
taught himself everything he could about crystals, 
their standard
arrangements, the geometries and the symmetries, the angles between
atoms. It all came down to one unknown, he realized: the nature of the
forces pressing the molecules into particular alignments. In its search for
fundamental laws ever farther down the hierarchy of sizes, physics had now
reached a level where molecular forces should be coming into focus.
Scientists could measure how much pressure it took to squeeze quartz a
given distance in a given direction. With the still-new technique of X-ray
diffraction, they could look at the shadow patterns of a regular crystal and
deduce its structure. As some theorists continued to look even deeper
toward the atom’s core, others now tried applying the quantum techniques
to questions of structure and chemistry. “A science of materials as distinct
from matter became possible,” a scholar of structure, Cyril Stanley Smith,
who worked with Feynman a few years later as the chief metallurgist on the
secret project at Los Alamos, said of this time. From atomic forces to the
stuff that feeds our senses—that was the connection waiting to be made.
From abstract energy levels to three-dimensional forms. As Smith added
epigrammatically, “Matter is a holograph of itself in its own internal
radiation.”

Forces or energy—that was the choice for those seeking to apply the
quantum understanding of the atom to the workings of real materials. At
stake was not mere terminology but a root decision about how to conceive
of a problem and how to proceed in calculating.

The conception of nature in terms of forces went back to Newton. It was
a direct way of dealing with the world, envisioning firsthand interactions
between objects. One exerts a force on another. A distinction between
force and energy did not emerge clearly until the nineteenth century, and
then, gradually, energy began to take over as the fulcrum of scientists’
thinking. Force is, in modern terms, a vector quantity, with both a
magnitude and a direction. Energy is directionless, scalar—meaning that it
has a magnitude only. With the rise of thermodynamics energy came to the
fore. It began to seem more fundamental. Chemical reactions could be

neatly computed as operations designed to minimize energy. Even a ball
rolling down a hill—moving from a state of higher to lower potential energy
—was seeking to minimize its energy. The Lagrangian approach that
Feynman resisted in his sophomore-year physics class also used a
minimum of energy to circumvent the laborious calculation of direct
interactions. And the law of conservation of energy provided a tidy
bookkeeping approach to a variety of calculations. No comparable law
existed for forces.

Yet Feynman continued to seek ways of using the language of forces,
and his senior thesis evolved beyond the problem Slater had posed. As
Feynman conceived the structure of molecules, forces were the natural
ingredients. He saw springlike bonds with varying stiffness, atoms
attracting and repelling one another. The usual energy-accounting methods
seemed secondhand and euphemistic. He titled his thesis—grandly
—“Forces and Stresses in Molecules” and began by arguing that it would
be more illuminating to attack molecular structure directly by means of
forces, intractable though that approach had been considered in the past.

Quantum mechanics had begun with energy for two reasons, he
contended. One was that the original quantum theorists had habitually
tested their formulas against a single type of application, the calculation of
the observed spectra of light emitted by atoms, where forces played no
obvious part. The other was that the wave equation of Schrödinger simply
did not lend itself to the calculation of vector quantities; its natural context
was the directionless measurement of energy.

In Feynman’s senior year, just over a decade after the three-year
revolution of Heisenberg, Schrödinger, and Dirac, the applied branches of
physics and chemistry had been drawn into an explosion of activity. To
outsiders quantum mechanics might have seemed a nuisance, with its
philosophical entanglements and computational nightmares. In the hands
of those analyzing the structures of metals or chemical reactions, however,
the new physics was slicing through puzzles that classical physics found
impenetrable. Quantum mechanics was triumphing not because a few
leading theorists found it mathematically convincing, but because hundreds
of materials scientists found that it worked. It gave them insights into
problems that had languished, and it gave them a renewed livelihood. One
had only to understand the manipulation of a few equations and one could

finally compute the size of an atom or the precise gray sheen of a pewter
surface.

Chief in the new handbook was Schrödinger’s wave equation. Quantum
mechanics taught that a particle was not a particle but a smudge, a
traveling cloud of probabilities, like a wave in that the essence was spread
out. The wave equation made it possible to compute with smudges and
accommodate the probability that a feature of interest might appear
anywhere within a certain range. This was essential. No classical
calculation could show how electrons would arrange themselves in a
particular atom: classically the negatively charged electrons should seek
their state of lowest energy and spiral in toward the positively charged
nuclei. Substance itself would vanish. Matter would crumple in on itself.
Only in terms of quantum mechanics was that impossible, because it would
give the electron a definite pointlike position. Quantum-mechanical
uncertainty was the air that saved the bubble from collapse. Schrödinger’s
equation showed where the electron clouds would find their minimum
energy, and on those clouds depended all that was solid in the world.

Often enough, it became possible to gain an accurate picture of where
the electrons’ charge would be distributed in the three-dimensional space
of a solid crystal lattice of molecules. That charge distribution in turn held
the massive nuclei of the atoms in place—again, in places that kept the
overall energy at a minimum. If a researcher wanted to calculate the forces
working on a given nucleus, there was a way to do it—a laborious way. He
had to calculate the energy, and then calculate it again, this time with the
nucleus slightly shifted out of position. Eventually he could draw a curve
representing the change in energy. The slope of that curve represented the
sharpness of the change—the force. Each varied configuration had to be
computed afresh. To Feynman this seemed wasteful and ugly.

It took him a few pages to demonstrate a better method. He showed that
one could calculate the force directly for a given configuration, without
having to look at nearby configurations at all. His computational technique
led directly to the slope of the energy curve—the force—instead of
producing the full curve and deriving the slope secondarily. The result
caused a small sensation among MIT’s physics faculty, many of whom had
spent enough time working on applied molecular problems to appreciate
Feynman’s remark, “It is to be emphasized that this permits a considerable

saving of labor of calculations.”

Slater made him rewrite the first version. He complained that Feynman
wrote the way he talked, hardly an acceptable style for a scientific paper.
Then he advised him to submit a shortened version for publication. The
Physical Review accepted it, with the title shortened as well, to “Forces in
Molecules.”

Not all computational devices have analogues in the word pictures that
scientists use to describe reality, but Feynman’s discovery did. It
corresponded to a theorem that was easy to state and almost as easy to
visualize: The force on an atom’s nucleus is no more or less than the
electrical force from the surrounding field of charged electrons—the
electrostatic force. Once the distribution of charge has been calculated
quantum mechanically, then from that point forward quantum mechanics
disappears from the picture. The problem becomes classical; the nuclei
can be treated as static points of mass and charge. Feynman’s approach
applies to all chemical bonds. If two nuclei act as though strongly attracted
to each other, as the hydrogen nuclei do when they bond to form a water
molecule, it is because the nuclei are each drawn toward the electrical
charge concentrated quantum mechanically between them.

That was all. His thesis had strayed from the main line of his thinking
about quantum mechanics, and he rarely thought about it again. When he
did, he felt embarrassed to have spent so much time on a calculation that
now seemed trivial and self-evident. As far as he knew, it was useless. He
had never seen a reference to it by another scientist. So he was surprised
to hear in 1948 that a controversy had erupted among physical chemists
about the discovery, now known as Feynman’s theorem or the FeynmanHellmann theorem. Some chemists felt it was too simple to be true.

Is He Good Enough?

A few months before graduation, most of the thirty-two brothers of Phi Beta
Delta posed for their portrait photograph. Feynman, seated at the left end
of the front row, still looked smaller and younger than his classmates. He
clenched his jaw, obeyed the photographer’s instruction to rest his hands
on his knees, and leaned gravely in toward the center. He went home at the

end of the term and returned for the ceremony in June 1939. He had just
learned to drive an automobile, and he drove his parents and Arline to
Cambridge. On the way he became sick to his stomach—from the tension
of driving, he thought. He was hospitalized for a few days, but he recovered
in time to graduate. Decades later he remembered the drive. He
remembered his friends teasing him when he donned his academic robe
—Princeton did not know what a rough guy it was getting. He remembered
Arline.

“That’s all I remember of it,” he told a historian. “I remember my sweet

girl.”

Slater left MIT not many years after Feynman. By then the urgency of war
research had brought I. I. Rabi from Columbia to become the vigorous
scientific personality driving a new laboratory, the Radiation Laboratory,
set up to develop the use of shorter and shorter radio wavelengths for the
detection of aircraft and ships through night and clouds: radar. It seemed to
some that Slater, unaccustomed to the shadow of a greater colleague,
found Rabi’s presence unbearable. Morse, too, left MIT to take a role in the
growing administrative structure of physics. Like so many scientists of the
middle rank, both men saw their reputations fade in their lifetimes. Both
published small autobiographies. Morse, in his, wrote about the challenges
in guiding students toward a career as esoteric as physics. He recalled a
visit from the father of a graduating senior named Richard. The father
struck Morse as uneducated, nervous merely to be visiting a university. He
did not speak well. Morse recalled his having said (“omitting his
hesitations and apologies”):

My son Richard is finishing his schooling here next spring. Now he
tells me he wants to go on to do more studying, to get still another
degree. I guess I can afford to pay his way for another three or four
years. But what I want to know is, is it worth it for him? He tells me
you’ve been working with him. Is he good enough to deserve the extra
schooling?

Morse tried not to laugh. Jobs in physics were hard to get in 1939, but he
told the father that Richard would surely do all right.

PRINCETON

The apostle of Niels Bohr at Princeton was a compact, gray-eyed, twentyeight-year-old assistant professor named John Archibald Wheeler who
had arrived the year before Feynman, in 1938. Wheeler had Bohr’s
rounded brow and soft features, as well as his way of speaking about
physics in oracular undertones. In the years that followed, no physicist
surpassed Wheeler in his appreciation for the mysterious or in his
command of the Delphic catchphrase:

A black hole has no hair was his. In fact he coined the term “black hole.”
There is no law except the law that there is no law.
I always keep two legs going, with one trying to reach ahead.
In any field find the strangest thing and then explore it.
Individual events. Events beyond law. Events so numerous and so
uncoordinated that, flaunting their freedom from formula, they yet
fabricate firm form.

He dressed like a businessman, his tie tightly knotted and his white cuffs
starched, and he fastidiously pulled out a pocket watch when he began a
session with a student (conveying a message: the professor will spare just
so much time …). It seemed to one of his Princeton colleagues, Robert R.
Wilson, that behind the gentlemanly façade lay a perfect gentleman—and
behind that façade another perfect gentleman, and on and on. “However,”
Wilson said, “somewhere among those polite façades there was a tiger
loose; a reckless buccaneer … who had the courage to look at any crazy
problem.” As a lecturer he performed with a magnificent self-assurance,
impressing his audience with elegant prose and provocative diagrams.
When he was a boy, he spent many hours poring over the drawings in a
book called Ingenious Mechanisms and Mechanical Devices. He made
adding machines and automatic pistols with gears and levers whittled from
wood, and his blackboard illustrations of the most foggy quantum
paradoxes retained that ingenious flavor, as though the world were a
wonderful silvery machine. Wheeler grew up in Ohio, the son of librarians
and the nephew of three mining engineers. He went to college in

Baltimore, got his graduate degree at Johns Hopkins University, and then
won a National Research Council Fellowship that brought him to
Copenhagen in 1934 via freighter (fifty-five dollars one way) to study with
Bohr.

He and Bohr worked together again, as colleagues this time, in the first
months of 1939. Princeton had hired Wheeler and promoted the
distinguished Hungarian physicist Eugene Wigner in a deliberate effort to
turn toward nuclear physics. MIT had remained deliberately conservative
about rushing to board the wagon train; Slater and Compton preferred to
emphasize well-roundedness and links to more applied fields. Not so
Princeton. Wheeler still remembered the magic of his first vision of
radioactivity: how he had sat in a lightless room, staring toward the black of
a zinc sulfide screen, counting the intermittent flashes of individual alpha
particles sent forth by a radon source. Bohr, meanwhile, had left the
growing tumult of Europe to visit Einstein’s institute in Princeton. When
Wheeler met his ship at the pier in New York, Bohr was carrying news
about what would now rapidly become the most propitious object in
physics: the uranium atom.

Compared to the hydrogen atom, stark kernel with which Bohr had
begun his quantum revolution, the uranium atom was a monster, the
heaviest atom in nature, bulked out with 92 protons and 140-odd neutrons,
so scarce in the cosmos that hydrogen atoms outnumber it by seventeen
trillion to one, and unstable, given to decaying at quantum mechanically
unpredictable moments down a chain of lighter elements or—this was the
extraordinary news that kept Bohr at his portable blackboard all through the
North Atlantic voyage—splitting, when slugged by a neutron, into odd pairs
of smaller atoms, barium and krypton or tellurium and zirconium, plus a
bonus of new neutrons and free energy. How was anyone to visualize this
bloated nucleus? As a collection of marbles sliding greasily against one
another? As a bunch of grapes squeezed together by nuclear rubber
bands? Or as a “liquid drop”—the phrase that spread like a virus through
the world of physics in 1939—a shimmering, jostling, oscillating globule
that pinches into an hourglass and then fissures at its new waist. It was this
last image, the liquid drop, that enabled Wheeler and Bohr to produce one
of those unreasonably powerful oversimplifications of science, an effective
theory of the phenomenon that had been named, only in the past year,

fission. (The word was not theirs, and they spent a late night trying to find a
better one. They thought about splitting or mitosis and then gave up.)

By any reasonable guess, a liquid drop should have served as a poor
approximation for the lumpy, raisin-studded complex at the heart of a
heavy atom, with each of two hundred–odd particles bound to each of the
others by a strong close-range nuclear force, a force quite different from
the electrical forces Feynman had analyzed on the scale of whole
molecules. For smaller atoms the liquid-drop metaphor failed, but for large
agglomerations like uranium it worked. The shape of the nucleus, like the
shape of a liquid drop, depends on a delicate balance between the two
opposing forces. Just as surface tension encourages a compact geometry
in a drop, so do the forces of nuclear attraction in an atom. The electrical
repulsion of the positively charged protons counters the attraction. Bohr
and Wheeler recognized the unexpected importance of the slow neutrons
that Fermi had found so useful at his laboratory in Rome. They made two
remarkable predictions: that only the rarer uranium isotope, uranium 235,
would fission explosively; and that neutron bombardment would also spark
fission in a new substance, with atomic number 94 and mass 239, not
found in nature and not yet created in the laboratory. To this pair of
theoretical assertions would shortly be devoted the greatest technological
enterprise the world had ever seen.

The 

laboratories of nuclear physics were spreading 
rapidly.
Considerable American inventive spirit had gone into the development of
an arsenal of machinery designed to accelerate beams of particles, smash
them into metal foils or gaseous atoms, and track the collision products
through chambers of ionizing gas. Princeton had one of the nation’s first
large “cyclotrons”—the name rang proudly of the future—completed in
1936 for the cost of a few automobiles. The university also kept smaller
accelerators working daily, manufacturing rare elements and new isotopes
and generating volumes of data. Almost any experimental result seemed
worthwhile when hardly anything was known. With all the newly cobbledtogether equipment came difficulties of measurement and interpretation,
often messy and ad hoc. A student of Wheeler’s, Heinz Barschall, came to
him in the early fall of 1939 with a typical problem. Like so many new
experimenters Barschall was using an accelerator beam to scatter
particles through an ionizing chamber, where their energies could be

measured. He needed to gauge the different energies that would appear
at different angles of recoil. Barschall had realized that his results were
distorted by the circumstances of the chamber itself. Some particles would
start outside the chamber; others would start inside and run into the
chamber’s cylindrical wall, and in neither case would the particle have its
full energy. The problem was to compensate, find a way to translate the
measured energies into the true energies. It was a problem of awkward
probabilities in a complicated geometry. Barschall had no idea where to
start. Wheeler said that he was too busy to think about it himself but that he
had a very bright new graduate student …

Barschall dutifully sought out Dick Feynman at the residential Graduate
College. Feynman listened but said nothing. Barschall assumed that would
be the end of it. Feynman was adjusting to this new world, much smaller,
for a physicist, than the scientific center he had left. He shopped for
supplies in the stores lining Nassau Street on the west edge of the
campus, and an older graduate student, Leonard Eisenbud, saw him in the
street. “You look like you’re going to be a good theoretical physicist,”
Eisenbud said. He gestured toward Feynman’s new wastebasket and
blackboard eraser. “You’ve bought the right tools.” The next time Feynman
saw Barschall, he surprised him with a sheaf of handwritten pages; he had
been riding on a train and had time to write out a full solution. Barschall
was overwhelmed, and Feynman had added another young physicist to the
growing group of his peers with a weighty private appreciation for his
ability.

Wheeler himself was already beginning to appreciate Feynman, who
had been assigned to him—neither of them quite knew why—as a
teaching assistant. Feynman had expected to be working with Wigner. He
was surprised at their first meeting to see that his professor was barely
older than he was. Then he was surprised again by Wheeler’s pointed
display of a pocket watch. He took in the message. At their second
meeting he pulled out a dollar pocket watch of his own and set it down
facing Wheeler’s. There was a pause; then both men laughed.

A Quaint Ceremonious Village

Princeton’s gentility was famous: the eating clubs, the arboreal lanes, the
ersatz-Georgian carved stone and stained glass, the academic gowns at
dinner and punctilious courtesies at tea. No other college so keenly
delineated the social status of its undergraduates as Princeton did with its
club system. Although the twentieth century had begun to intrude—the
graduate departments were growing in stature, and Nassau Street had
been paved—Princeton before the war remained, as F. Scott Fitzgerald
described it adoringly a generation earlier, “lazy and good-looking and
aristocratic,” an outpost for New York, Philadelphia, and Southern society.
Its faculty, though increasingly professional, was still sprinkled with
Fitzgerald’s “mildly poetic gentlemen.” Even the kindly genius who became
the town’s most famous resident on arriving in 1933 could not resist a
gibe: “A quaint ceremonious village,” Einstein wrote, “of puny demigods on
stilts.”

from a distance 

Graduate students, on track to a professional world, were partly
detached from the university’s more frivolous side. The physics department
in particular was moving decisively with the times. It had seemed to
Feynman 
that Princeton’s physicists were
disproportionately represented in the current journals. Even so he had to
adjust to a place which, even more than Harvard and Yale, styled itself after
the great English universities, with courtyards and residential “colleges.” At
the Graduate College a “porter” monitored the downstairs entranceway.
The formality genuinely frightened Feynman, until slowly he realized that the
obligatory black gowns hid bare arms or sweaty tennis clothes. The
afternoon he arrived at Princeton in the fall of 1939, Sunday tea with Dean
Eisenhart turned his edginess about social convention into anxiety. He
dressed in his good suit. He walked through the door and saw—worse
than he had imagined—young women. He could not tell whether he was
supposed to sit. A voice behind him said, “Would you like cream or lemon
in your tea, sir?” He turned and saw the dean’s wife, a famous lioness of
Princeton society. It was said that when the mathematician Carl Ludwig
Siegel returned to Germany in 1935 after a year in Princeton he told
friends that Hitler had been bad but Mrs. Eisenhart was worse.

Feynman blurted, “Both, please.”
“Heh-heh-heh-heh-heh,” he heard her say. “Surely you’re joking, Mr.
Feynman!” More code—the phrase evidently signaled a gaffe. Whenever

he thought about it afterward, the words rang in his ears: surely you’re
joking. Fitting in was not easy. It bothered him that the raincoat his parents
sent was too short. He tried sculling, the Ivy League sport that seemed
least foreign to his Far Rockaway experience—he remembered the many
happy hours spent rowing in the inlets of the south shore—and promptly fell
from the impossibly slender boat into the water. He worried about money.
When he entertained guests in his room they would share rice pudding and
grapes, or peanut butter and jelly on crackers with pineapple juice. As a
first-year teaching assistant he earned fifteen dollars a week. Cashing
several savings certificates to pay a bill for $265, he spent twenty minutes
calculating what combination would forfeit the least interest. The difference
between the worst case and the best case, he found, came to eight cents.
Outwardly, though, he cultivated his brashness. Not long after he arrived,
he had his neighbors at the Graduate College convinced that he and
Einstein (whom he had not met) were on regular speaking terms. They
listened with awe to these supposed conversations with the great man on
the pay phone in the hallway: “Yeah, I tried that … yeah, I did … oh, okay, I’ll
try that.” Most of the time he was actually speaking with Wheeler.

As Wheeler’s teaching assistant—first for a course in mechanics, then in
nuclear physics—Feynman quickly found himself taking over in the
professor’s absence (and it began to sink in that facing a roomful of
students was part of the profession he had chosen). He also met with
Wheeler weekly on research problems of their own. At first Wheeler
assigned the problems. Then a collaboration took shape.

The purview of physics had exploded in the first four decades of the
century. Relativity, the quantum, cosmic rays, radioactivity, the nucleus—
these new realms held the attention of leading physicists to the virtual
exclusion of such classical topics as mechanics, thermodynamics,
hydrodynamics, statistical mechanics. To a smart graduate student fresh
on the theoretical scene these traditional fields seemed like textbook
science, already part of history and—in their applied forms—engineering.
Physics was “inward bound,” as its chronicler Abraham Pais put it; into the
core of the atom the theorists went. All the superlatives were here. The
experimental apparatus was the most expensive (machines could now
cost thousands or even tens of thousands of dollars). The necessary
energies were the highest. The materials and “particles” (this word was

acquiring a specialized meaning) were the most esoteric. The ideas were
the strangest. Relativity notoriously changed astronomers’ sense of the
cosmos but found its most routine application in the physics of the atom,
where near-light speeds made relativistic mathematics essential. As
experimenters learned to ply greater levels of energy, the basic
constituents gave way to new units even more basic. Through quantum
mechanics, physics had established a primacy over chemistry—itself
formerly the most fundamental of sciences, if the most fundamental was the
one responsible for nature’s basic constituents.

As the thirties ended and the forties began, particle physics had not
established its later dominance of the public relations of science. In
choosing a theme for the annual Washington Conference on theoretical
physics in 1940, organizers considered “The Elementary Particles” and the
quaintly geophysical “Interior of the Earth”—and chose the interior of the
earth. Still, neither Feynman nor Wheeler had any doubt about where a
pure theorist’s focus must turn. The fundamental issue in the fundamental
science was the weakness in the heart of quantum mechanics. At MIT
Feynman had read Dirac’s 1935 text as a cliffhanger with the most thrilling
possible conclusion: “It seems that some essentially new physical ideas
are here needed.” Dirac and the other pioneers had taken their quantum
electrodynamics—the theory of the interplay of electricity, magnetism, light,
and matter—as far as they could. Yet it remained incomplete, as Dirac well
knew.

The difficulty concerned the electron, the fundamental speck of negative
charge. As a modern concept, the electron was still young, although many
high-school students now performed (as Feynman had in Far Rockaway) a
tabletop experiment showing that electric charge came in discrete units.
What exactly was the electron? Wilhelm Röntgen, the discoverer of X rays,
forbade the use of this upstart term in his laboratories as late as 1920. The
developers of quantum mechanics, attempting to describe the electron’s
charge or mass or momentum or energy or spin in almost every new
equation, nevertheless maintained a silent agnosticism about certain
issues of its existence. Particularly troubling: Was it a finite pellet or an
infinitesimal point? In his model of the atom, already obsolete, Niels Bohr
had imagined electrons as miniature planetoids orbiting the nucleus; now
the atom’s electron seemed more to reverberate in an oscillatory harmony.

In some formulations it assumed a wavelike cloak, the wave representing a
distribution of probabilities that it would appear in particular places at
particular times. But what would appear? An entity, a unit—a particle?

Even before quantum mechanics, a worm had gnawed at the heart of the
classical understanding. The equations linking the electron’s energy (or
mass) and charge implicated another quantity, its radius. As its size
diminished, the electron’s energy grew, just as the pressure transmitted by
a carpenter’s hammer becomes thousands of pounds per square inch
when concentrated at the point of a nail. Furthermore, if the electron was to
be imagined as a little ball of finite size, then what force or glue kept it from
bursting from its own charge? Physicists found themselves manipulating a
quantity called the “classical electron radius.” Classical in this context
came to mean something like make-believe. The problem was that the
alternative—a vanishingly small, pointlike electron—left the equations of
electrodynamics plagued with divisions by zero: infinities. Infinitely small
nails, infinitely energetic hammers.

In a sense the equations were measuring the effect of the electron’s
charge on itself, its “self-energy.” That effect would increase with proximity,
and how much nearer could the electron be to itself? If the distance were
zero, the effect would be infinite—impossible. The wave equation of
quantum mechanics only made the infinities more complicated. Instead of
the grade-school horror of a division by zero, physicists now contemplated
equations that grew out of bounds because they summed infinitely many
wavelengths, infinitely many oscillations in the field—although even now
Feynman did not quite understand this formulation of the infinities problem.
Temporarily, for simple problems, physicists could get reasonable
answers by the embarrassing expedient of discarding the parts of the
equations that diverged. As Dirac recognized, however, in concluding his
Principles of Quantum Mechanics, the electron’s infinities meant that the
theory was mortally flawed. It seems that some essentially new physical
ideas are here needed.

Feynman quietly nursed an attachment to a solution so radical and
straightforward that it could only have appealed to someone ignorant of the
literature. He proposed—to himself—that electrons not be allowed to act
on themselves at all. The idea seemed circular and silly. As he recognized,
however, eliminating self-action meant eliminating the field itself. It was the

field, the totality of the charges of all electrons, that served as the agent of
self-action. An electron contributed its charge to the field and was
influenced by the field in turn. Suppose there was no field. Then perhaps
the circularity could be broken. Each electron would act directly on another.
Only the direct interaction between charges would be permitted. One
would have to build a time delay into the equations, for whatever form this
interaction took, it could hardly surpass the speed of light. The interaction
was light, in the form of radio waves, visible light, X rays, or any of the other
manifestations of electromagnetic radiation. “Shake this one, that one
shakes later,” Feynman said later. “The sun atom shakes; my eye electron
shakes eight minutes later because of a direct interaction across.”

No field; no self-action. Implicit in Feynman’s attitude was a sense that
the laws of nature were not to be discovered so much as constructed.
Although language blurred the distinction, Feynman was asking not
whether an electron acted on itself but whether the theorist could plausibly
discard the concept; not whether the field existed in nature but whether it
had to exist in the physicist’s mind. When Einstein banished the ether, he
was reporting the absence of something real—at least something that
might have been—like a surgeon who opened a chest and reported that
the bloody, pulsing heart was not to be found. The field was different. It had
begun as an artifice, not an entity. Michael Faraday and James Clerk
Maxwell, the nineteenth-century Britons who contrived the notion and made
it into an implement no more dispensable than a surgeon’s scalpel, started
out apologetically. They did not mean to be taken literally when they wrote
of “lines of force”—Faraday could actually see these when he sprinkled
iron filings near a magnet—or “idle wheels,” the pseudomechanical,
invisible vortices that Maxwell imagined filling space. They assured their
readers that these were analogies, though analogies with the newly
formidable weight of mathematical rectitude.

The field had not been invented without reason. It had unified light and
electromagnetism, establishing forever that the one was no more or less
than a ripple in the other. As an abstract successor to the now-defunct
ether the field was ideal for accommodating waves, and energy did seem
to ripple wavelike from its sources. Anyone who played with electrical
circuits and magnets as intently as Faraday and Maxwell could feel the way
the “vibrations” or “undulations” could twist and spin like tubes or wheels.

Crucially, the field also obviated the unpleasantly magical idea of action at
a distance, objects influencing one another from afar. In the field, forces
propagated sensibly and continuously from one place to the next. There
was no jumping about, no sorcerous obeying of faraway orders. As Percy
Bridgman, an American experimental physicist and philosopher, said, “It is
felt to be more acceptable to rational thought to conceive of the
gravitational action of the sun on the earth, for example, as propagated
through the intermediate space by the handing on of some sort of influence
from one point to its proximate neighbor, than to think of the action
overleaping the intervening distance and finding its target by some sort of
teleological clairvoyance.” By then scientists had efficiently forgotten that
the field, too, was a piece of magic—a wave-bearing nullity, or empty
space that was not quite empty (and more than space). Or in the elegant
phrase of a later theorist, Steven Weinberg: “the tension in the membrane,
but without the membrane.” The field grew so dominant in physicists’
thinking that even matter itself sometimes withdrew to the status of mere
appendage: a “knot” of the field, or a “blemish,” or as Einstein himself said,
merely a place where the field was especially intense.

Embrace the field or abhor it—either way, by the nineteen-thirties the
choice seemed more one of method than reality. The events of 1926 and
1927 had made that clear. No one could be so naïve now as to ask
whether Heisenberg’s matrices or Schrödinger’s wave functions existed.
They were alternative ways of viewing the same processes. Thus
Feynman, looking for a new eyepiece himself, began drifting back to a
interaction. The wavelike
classical notion of unfieldlike particle 
transmission of energy and the hocus-pocus of action at a distance were
issues that he would have to address. In the meantime, Wheeler, too, had
reasons to be drawn toward this implausibly pure conception. Electrons
might interact directly, without the mediation of the field.

Folds and Rhythms

Feynman tended to associate more with the mathematicians than the
physicists at the Graduate College. Students from the two groups joined
each afternoon for tea in a common lounge—more English tradition

transplanted—and Feynman would listen to an increasingly alien jargon.
Pure mathematics had swerved away from the fields of direct use to
contemporary physicists and toward such seeming esoterica as topology,
the study of shapes in two, three, or many dimensions without regard to
rigid lengths or angles. An effective divorce had occurred between
mathematics and physics. By the time practitioners reached the graduate
level, they shared no courses and had nothing practical to say to one
another. Feynman listened to the mathematicians standing in groups or
sitting on the couch at tea, talking about their proofs. Rightly or wrongly he
felt he had an intuition for what theorems could be derived from what
lemmas, even without quite understanding the subject. He enjoyed the
strange rhetoric. He enjoyed trying to guess the counterintuitive answers to
their nearly unvisualizable questions, and he enjoyed applying the
physicist’s favorite needle, the claim that mathematicians spent their time
proving the obvious. Although he teased them, he thought they were an
exciting group—happy and interested in a kind of science that was getting
beyond him. One friend was Arthur Stone, a patient young man attending
Princeton on a fellowship from England. Another was John Tukey, who
later became one of the world’s leading statisticians. These men spent
their leisure time in curious ways. Stone had brought with him Englishstandard loose-leaf notebooks. The American-standard paper he bought
at Woolworth’s overhung the notebooks by an inch, so he presently found
himself with a supply of inch-wide paper ribbons, suitable for folding and
twisting in different configurations. He tried diagonal folds at the 60-degree
angle that produced rows of equilateral triangles. Then, following these
folds, he wrapped a strip into a perfect hexagon.

Flexing a hexaflexagon.

When he closed the loop by taping the ends together, he found that he
had created an odd toy: by pinching opposite corners of the hexagon, he
could perform a queer origami-like fold, producing a new hexagon with a
different set of triangles exposed. Repeating the operation exposed a third
face. One more “flex” brought back the original configuration. In effect, he
had a flattened tube that he was steadily turning inside out.

He considered this overnight. In the morning he took a longer strip and
confirmed a new hypothesis: that a more elaborate hexagon could be
made to cycle through not three but six different faces. The cycling was not
so straightforward this time. Three of the faces tended to come up again
and again, while the other three seemed harder to find. This was a
nontrivial challenge to his topological imagination. Centuries of origami
had not produced such an elegantly convoluted object. Within days copies
of these “flexagons”—or, as this subspecies came to be more precisely
known, 
faces)—were
circulating across the dining hall at lunch and dinner. The steering
committee of the flexagon investigation soon comprised Stone, Tukey, a
mathematician named Bryant Tuckerman, and their physicist friend

“hexahexaflexagons” 

(six sides, six 

internal 

Feynman. Honing their dexterity with paper and tape, they made
hexaflexagons with twelve faces buried amid the folds, then twenty-four,
then forty-eight. The number of varieties within each species rose rapidly
according to a law that was far from evident. The theory of flexigation
flowered, acquiring the flavor, if not quite the substance, of a hybrid of
topology and network theory. Feynman’s best contribution was the
invention of a diagram, called in retrospect the Feynman diagram, that
showed all the possible paths through a hexaflexagon.
Seventeen years later, in 1956, the flexagons 

reached Scientific
American in an article under the byline of Martin Gardner. “Flexagons”
launched Gardner’s career as a minister to the nation’s recreationalmathematics underground, through twenty-five years of “Mathematical
Games” columns and more than forty books. His debut article both
captured and fed a minor craze. Flexagons were printed as advertising
flyers and greeting cards. They 
inspired dozens of scholarly or
semischolarly articles and several books. Among the hundreds of letters
the article provoked was one from the Allen B. Du Mont Laboratories in
New Jersey that began:

Sirs: I was quite taken with the article entitled “Flexagons” in your
December issue. It took us only six or seven hours to paste the
hexahexaflexagon together in the proper configuration. Since then it
has been a source of continuing wonder.

But we have a problem. This morning one of our fellows was sitting
flexing the hexahexaflexagon idly when the tip of his necktie became
caught in one of the folds. With each successive flex, more of his tie
vanished into the flexagon. With the sixth flexing he disappeared
entirely.

We have been flexing the thing madly, and can find no trace of him,
the

located a sixteenth configuration of 

but we have 
hexahexaflexagon… .

The spirits of play and intellectual inquiry ran together. Feynman spent
slow afternoons sitting in the bay window of his room, using slips of paper
to ferry ants back and forth to a box of sugar he had suspended with string,
to see what he could learn about how ants communicate and how much
geometry they can internalize. One neighbor barged in on Feynman sitting
by the window, open, on a wintry day, madly stirring a pot of Jell-O with a

the motile 

spoon and shouting “Don’t bother me!” He was trying to see how the Jell-O
would coagulate while in motion. Another neighbor provoked an argument
techniques of human spermatozoa; Feynman
about 
disappeared and soon returned with a sample. With John Tukey, Feynman
carried out a long, introspective investigation into the human ability to keep
track of time by counting. He ran up and down stairs to quicken his
heartbeat and practiced counting socks and seconds simultaneously. They
discovered that Feynman could read to himself silently and still keep track
of time but that if he spoke he would lose his place. Tukey, on the other
hand, could keep track of the time while reciting poetry aloud but not while
reading. They decided that their brains were applying different functions to
the task of counting: Feynman was using an aural rhythm, hearing the
numbers, while Tukey visualized a sort of tape with numbers passing
behind his eyes. Tukey said years later: “We were interested and happy to
be empirical, to try things out, to organize and reduce to simple things what
had been observed.”

Once in a while a small piece of knowledge from the world outside
science would float Feynman’s way and stick like a bur from a chestnut.
One of the graduate students had developed a passion for the poetry of
Edith Sitwell, then considered modern and eccentric because of her
flamboyant diction and cacophonous, jazzy rhythms. He read some poems
aloud, and suddenly Feynman seemed to catch on; he took the book and
started reciting gleefully. “Rhythm is one of the principal translators
between dream and reality,” the poet said of her own work. “Rhythm might
be described as, to the world of sound, what light is to the world of sight.”
To Feynman rhythm was a drug and a lubricant. His thoughts sometimes
seemed to slip and flow with a variegated drumbeat that his friends
noticed spilling out into his fingertips, restlessly tapping on desks and
notebooks. “While a universe grows in my head,—” Sitwell wrote,

I have dreams, though I have not a bed—

The thought of a world and a day
When all may be possible, still come my way.

Forward or Backward?

For a while the tea-time conversation among the physicists both at
Princeton and at the Institute for Advanced Study was dominated by the
image of a rotating lawn sprinkler, an S-shaped apparatus spun by the
recoil of the water it sprays forth. Nuclear physicists, quantum theorists,
and even pure mathematicians were consumed by the problem: What
would happen if this familiar device were placed under water and made to
suck water in instead of spewing it out? Would it spin in the reverse
direction, because the direction of the flow was now reversed, pulling
rather than pushing? Or would it spin in the same direction, because the
same twisting force was exerted by the water, whichever way it flowed, as
it was bent around the curve of the S? (“It’s clear to me at first sight,” a
friend of Feynman’s said to him some years later. Feynman shot back: “It’s
clear to everybody at first sight. The trouble was, some guy would think it
was perfectly clear one way, and another guy would think it was perfectly
clear the other way.”) In an increasingly sophisticated time the simple
problems still had the capacity to surprise. One did not have to probe far
into physicists’ understanding of Newton’s laws before reaching a shallow
bottom. Every action produces an equal and opposite reaction—that was
the principle at work in the lawn sprinkler, as in a rocket. The inverse
problem forced people to test their understanding of where, exactly, the
reaction wielded its effects. At the point of the nozzle? Somewhere in the
curve of the S, where the twisted metal forces the water to change course?
Wheeler was asked for his own verdict one day. He said that Feynman had
absolutely convinced him the day before that it went around backward; that
Feynman had absolutely convinced him today that it went around forward;
and that he did not yet know which way Feynman would convince him the
next day.

If the mind was the most convenient of laboratories, it was not proving
the most trustworthy. Because the Gedankenexperiment was failing,
Feynman decided to bring the lawn-sprinkler problem back into the world
of matter—stiff metal and wet water. He bent a piece of tubing into an S.
He ran a piece of soft rubber hose into it. Now he needed a convenient
source of compressed air.

The Palmer Physical Laboratory at Princeton housed a magnificent

array of facilities, though not quite up to the standards of MIT. There were
four large laboraories and several smaller ones, with a total floor space of
more than two acres. Machine shops supplied electrical charging devices,
storage batteries, switchboards, chemical equipment, and diffraction
gratings. The third floor was devoted to a high-voltage laboratory capable
of direct currents at 400,000 volts. A low-temperature laboratory had
machinery for liquefying hydrogen. Palmer’s pride, however, was its new
cyclotron, built in 1936. Feynman had made a point of wandering over the
day after he arrived at Princeton and had tea with the Dean. By
comparison, MIT’s even newer cyclotron was an elegant futuristic
masterpiece of shiny metal and geometrically arrayed dials; when MIT had
finally decided to invest in high-energy physics, it had not stinted.
Princeton’s gave Feynman a shock. He made his way down into the
basement of Palmer, opened the door, and saw wires hanging like
cobwebs from the ceiling. Safety valves for the cooling system were
exposed, and water dripped from them. Tools were scattered on tables. It
could not have looked less like Princeton. He thought of his wooden-crate
laboratory at home in Far Rockaway.

The mystery of 

the 

lawn sprinkler. When 

it sprays water, 

it spins

counterclockwise.But what happens when it is made to suck water in?

Amid the chaos, it seemed reasonable enough for Feynman to borrow
the use of an outlet for compressed air. He attached the rubber tube and
pushed the end through a large cork. He lowered his miniature lawn

sprinkler through the neck of a giant glass water bottle and sealed the
bottle with the cork. Rather than try to suck water from the tube, he was
going to pump air into the top of the bottle. That would increase the
pressure of the water, which would then flow backward into the S-shaped
pipe, up the rubber hose, and out the bottle.

He turned on the air valve. The apparatus gave a slight tremble, and
water started to dribble from the cork. More air—the flow of water
increased and the rubber tube seemed to shake but not to twist, at least
not with any confidence. Feynman opened the valve farther, and the bottle
exploded, showering water and glass across the room. The head of the
cyclotron banished Feynman from the laboratory henceforth.

Sobering though Feynman’s experimental failure was, for years to come
he and Wheeler both delighted in telling the story, and they were both
scrupulous about never revealing the answer to the original question.
Feynman had worked it out correctly, however. His physical intuition had
never been sharper, nor his ability to translate fluently between a palpable
sense of the physics and the formal mathematical equations. His
experiment had actually worked, until it exploded. Which way does the lawn
sprinkler turn? It does not turn at all. As the nozzles suck water in, they do
not pull themselves along, like a rope climber pulling himself up hand over
hand. They have no purchase on the water ahead. And the idea of force
exerted as a torque within the curve of the S is beside the point. In the
normal version, water sprays forth in organized jets. The action and
reaction are straightforward and measurable. The momentum of the water
spraying in one direction equals the momentum that spins the nozzle in the
opposite direction. But in the inverse case, when water is sucked in, there
are no jets. The water is not organized. It enters the nozzle from all
directions and therefore applies no force at all.

A development in twentieth-century entertainment technology—the
motion picture—incidentally provided an advance in the technology of
thought experiments. It was now natural for a scientist, in his mind’s
laboratory, to play the film backward. In the case of the lawn sprinkler,
reversibility proved to be an illusion. If the flow of the water were visible, a
motion picture of an ordinary lawn sprinkler played backward would look
distinctly different from the sucking lawn sprinkler played forward.
Filmmakers themselves had been seduced by the new, often comical

insights that could be gained by taking a strip of celluloid and running it
backward through the projector. Divers sprang feet first from lakes as a
spray of water collapsed into the space left behind. Fires drew smoke from
the air and created a trail of new-made paper. Fragmented eggshells
assembled themselves around shuddering chicks.

For Feynman and Wheeler reversibility was becoming a central issue at
the level of atomic processes, where spins and forces interacted more
abstractly than in a lawn sprinkler. It was well known that the equations
describing the motions and collisions of objects ran equally well forward
and backward. They were symmetrical with respect to time, at least where
just a few objects were concerned. How embarrassing, therefore, that time
seemed so one-way in the real world, where a small amount of energy
could scramble an egg or shatter a dish and where unscrambling and
unshattering were beyond the power of science. “Time’s arrow” was
already the catchphrase for this directionality, so evident to common
experience, yet so invisible in the equations of physicists. There, in the
equations, the road from past to future looked identical to the road from
future to past. “There is no signboard to indicate that it is a one-way street,”
complained Arthur Eddington. The paradox had been there all along, since
Newton at least, but relativity had highlighted it. The mathematician
Hermann Minkowski, by visualizing time as a fourth dimension, had begun
to reduce past-future to the status of any pair of directions: left-right, updown, back-front. The physicist drawing his diagrams obtains a God’s-eye
view. In the space-time picture a line representing the path of a particle
through time simply exists, past and future visible together. The fourdimensional space-time manifold displays all eternity at once.

The laws of nature are not rules controlling the metamorphosis of what is
into what will be. They are descriptions of patterns that exist, all at once, in
the whole tapestry. The picture is hard to reconcile with our everyday sense
that time is special. Even the physicist has his memories of the past and
his aspirations for the future, and no space-time diagram quite obliterates
the difference between them.

Philosophers, 

in whose province such speculations had usually
belonged, were left with a muddy and senescent set of concepts. The
distress of 
their adverbs:
sempiternally, hypostatically, tenselessly, retrodictably. Centuries of

the philosophers of 

time spilled 

into 

speculation and debate had left them unprepared for the physicists’
sudden demolition of the notion of simultaneity (in the relativistic universe it
meant nothing to say that two events took place at the same time). With
simultaneity gone, sequentiality was foundering, causality was under
pressure, and scientists generally felt themselves free to consider temporal
possibilities that would have seemed farfetched a generation before.

In the fall of 1940 Feynman returned to the fundamental problem with
which he had flirted since his undergraduate days. Could the ugly infinities
of quantum theory be eliminated by forbidding the possibility that an
electron acts on itself—by eliminating, in effect, the field? Unfortunately he
had meanwhile learned what was wrong with his idea. The problem was a
phenomenon that could only be explained, it seemed, in terms of the action
of an electron on itself. When real electrons are pushed, they push back: an
accelerating electron drains energy by radiating it away. In effect the
electron feels a resistance, called radiation resistance, and extra force has
to be applied to overcome it. A broadcasting antenna, radiating energy in
the form of radio waves, encounters radiation resistance—extra current
has to be sent through the antenna to make up for it. Radiation resistance
is at work when a hot, glowing object cools off. Because of radiation
resistance, an electron in an atom, alone in empty space, loses energy and
dies out; the lost energy has been radiated away in the form of light. To
explain why this damping takes place, physicists assumed they had no
choice but to imagine a force exerted by the electron on itself. By what
else, in empty space?

One day, however, Feynman walked into Wheeler’s office with a new
idea. He was “pie-eyed,” he confessed, from struggling with an obscure
problem Wheeler had given him. Instead he had turned back to self-action.
What if (he thought) an electron isolated in empty space does not emit
radiation at all, any more than a tree makes a sound in an empty forest.
Suppose radiation were to be permitted only when there is both a source
and a receiver. Feynman imagined a universe with just two electrons. The
first shakes. It exerts a force on the second. The second shakes and
generates a force that acts back on the first. He computed the force by a
familiar field equation of Maxwell’s, but in this two-particle universe there
was to be no field, if the field meant a medium in which waves were freely
spreading outward on their own.

He asked Wheeler, Could such a force, exerted by one particle on
another and then back on the first, account for the phenomenon of radiation
resistance?

Wheeler loved the idea—it was the sort of approach he might have
taken, stripping a problem down to nothing but a pair of point charges and
trying to build up a new theory from first principles. But he saw immediately
that the numbers would come out wrong. The force coming back to the first
charge would depend on how strong the second charge was, how massive
it was, and how near it was. But none of those quantities influence
radiation resistance. This objection seemed obvious 
to Feynman
afterward, but at the time he was astonished by his professor’s fast insight.
And there was another problem: Feynman had not properly accounted for
the delay in the transmission of the force to and fro. Whatever force was
exerted back on the first particle would come at the wrong time, too late to
match the known effect of radiation resistance. In fact Feynman suddenly
realized that he had been describing a different phenomenon altogether, a
painfully simple one: ordinary reflected light. He felt foolish.

Time delay had not been a feature of the original electromagnetic theory.
In Maxwell’s time, on the eve of relativity, it still seemed natural to assume,
as Newton had, that forces acted instantaneously. An imaginative leap was
needed to see that the earth swerves in its orbit not because the sun is
there but because it was there eight minutes before, the time needed for
gravity’s influence to cross nearly a hundred million miles of space—to see
that if the sun were plucked away, the earth would continue to orbit for eight
minutes. To accommodate the insights of relativity, the field equations had
to be amended. The waves were now retarded waves, held back by the
finite speed of light.

Here the problem of time’s symmetry entered the picture. The
electromagnetic equations worked magnificently when retarded waves
were correctly incorporated. They worked equally well when the sign of the
time quantities was reversed, from plus to minus. Translated back from
mathematics into physics, that meant advanced waves—waves that were
received before they were emitted. Understandably, physicists preferred to
stay with the retarded-wave solutions. An advanced wave, running
backward in time, seemed peculiar. Viewed in close-up it would look like
any other wave, but it would converge on its source, like a concentric ripple

heading toward the center of a pond, where a rock was about to fly out—
the film played backward again. Thus, despite their mathematical
soundness, the advanced-wave solutions to field equations stayed in the
background, an unresolved but not especially urgent puzzle.

Wheeler immediately proposed to Feynman that they consider what
would happen if advanced waves were added to his two-electron model.
What if the apparent time-symmetry of the equations were taken seriously?
One would have to imagine a shaken electron sending its radiation
outward symmetrically in time. Like a lighthouse sending its beam both
north and south, an electron might shine both forward and backward to the
future and the past. It seemed to Wheeler that a combination of advanced
and retarded waves might cancel each other in a way that would overcome
the lack of any time delay in the phenomenon of radiation resistance. (The
canceling of waves was well understood. Depending on whether they were
in or out of phase, waves of the same frequency would interfere either
constructively or destructively. If their crests and troughs lined up exactly,
the size of the waves would double. If crests lined up with troughs, then the
waves would precisely neutralize each other.) He and Feynman, calculating
excitedly over the next hour, found that the other difficulties also seemed to
vanish. The energy arriving back at the original source no longer depended
on the mass, the charge, or the distance of the second particle. Or so it
seemed, in the first approximation produced by their rough computation on
Wheeler’s blackboard.

Feynman set to work on this possibility. He was not troubled by the
seemingly nonsensical meaning of it. His original notion contained nothing
out of the ordinary: Shake a charge here—then another charge shakes a
little later. The new notion turned paradoxical as soon as it was expressed
in words: Shake a charge here—then another charge shakes a little
earlier. It explicitly required an action backward in time. Where was the
cause and where was the effect? If Feynman ever felt that this was a deep
thicket to enter merely for the sake of eliminating the electron’s self-action,
he suppressed the thought. After all, self-action created an undeniable
contradiction within quantum mechanics, and the entire profession was
finding it insoluble. At any rate, in the era of Einstein and Bohr, what was
one more paradox? Feynman already believed that it was the mark of a
good physicist never to say, “Oh, whaddyamean, how could that be?”

The work required intense calculation, working out the correct forms of
the equations, always checking to make sure that the apparent paradox
never turned into an actual mathematical contradiction. Gradually the basic
model became, not a system of two particles, but a system where the
electron interacted with a multitude of other “absorber” particles all around
it. It would be a universe where all radiation eventually reached the
surrounding absorber. As it happened, that softened the most bizarre timereversed tendencies of the model. For those who were squeamish about
the prospect of effects anticipating their causes, Feynman offered a barely
more palatable view: that energy is momentarily “borrowed” from empty
space, and paid back later in exact measure. The lender of this energy, the
absorber, was assumed to be a chaotic multitude of particles, moving in all
directions so that almost all its effects on a given particle would cancel one
another. The only time an electron would feel the presence of this
absorbing layer would be when it accelerated. Then the effect of the source
on the absorber would return to the source at exactly the right time, with
exactly the right force, to account for radiation resistance. Thus, given that
one cosmological assumption—that the universe has enough matter in
every direction to soak up outgoing radiation—Feynman found that a
system of equations in which advanced and retarded waves were
combined half and half seemed to withstand every objection.

Waves forward and backward in time. Wheeler and Feynman tried to work out a
consistent scheme for the interactions of particles, and they embroiled themselves in
paradoxes of past and future . A particle shakes; its influence spreads outward like
waves from a stone thrown into a pond. To make their theory symmetrical, they also had
to use inward-traveling waves-implying action backward in time.

They found that they could avoid unpleasant paradoxes because these normal and
time-reserved waves ("retarded" and "advanced") canceled each other out-but only if the
universe was arranged so as to guarantee that all radiation would be absorbed
somewhere, sometime. A beam of light traveling forever into infinite, empty space, never

striking an absorber, would foil their theory's bookkeeping. Thus cosmologists and
philosophers of time continued to consider their scheme long after it had been
supplanted in the mainstream of quantum theory.

He described it to his graduate student friends and challenged them to
find a paradox he could not explain his way through. For example, could
one design a mechanism with a target that would shut a gate when struck
by a pellet, such that the advanced field closed the gate before the pellet
arrived, in which case the pellet could not strike the target, in which case
the advanced field would not close the gate after all … He imagined a
Rube Goldberg contraption that might have come straight from Wheeler’s
old book of ingenious mechanisms and mechanical devices. Feynman’s
calculations suggested that the model was surprisingly immune to
paradox. As long as the theory relied on probabilities, it seemed to escape
fatal contradictions. It did not matter where the absorber was or how it was
shaped, as long as there were absorbing particles off at some distance in
every direction. Only if there were “holes” in the surrounding layer, places
where radiation could go forever without being absorbed, could the
advanced effects make trouble, arriving back at the source before they had
been triggered.

Wheeler had his own motive for pursuing this quixotic theory. Most
physicists were now persuaded that the atom embodied at least three
irreconcilably different particles, electrons, protons, and neutrons, and
cosmic rays were providing intimations of several more. This proliferation
offended Wheeler’s faith in the ultimate simplicity of the world. He
continued to cherish a notion so odd that he was reluctant to discuss it
aloud, the idea that a different kind of theory would reveal everything to be
made of electrons after all. It was crazy, he knew. But if electrons were to
be the ultimate building blocks, their radiative forces would have to provide
the key, in ways that the standard theory was not prepared to explain.
Within weeks he began pressing Feynman to write a preliminary paper. If
they were going to make grand theories, Wheeler would make sure they
publicized the work properly. Early in 1941 he told Feynman to prepare a

for 

presentation 
for
distinguished visiting physicists, in February. It would be Feynman’s first
professional talk. He was nervous about it.

the departmental seminar, usually a 

forum 

As the day approached, Wigner, who ran the colloquiums, stopped
Feynman in the hall. Wigner said he had heard enough from Wheeler
about the absorber theory to think it was important. Because of its
implications for cosmology he had invited the great astrophysicist Henry
Norris Russell. John von Neumann, the mathematician, was also going to
come. The formidable Wolfgang Pauli happened to be visiting from Zurich;
he would be there. And though Albert Einstein rarely bestirred himself to
the colloquiums, he had expressed interest in attending this one.

Wheeler tried to calm Feynman by promising to field questions from the
audience. Wigner tried to brief him. If Professor Russell appears to fall
asleep during your talk, Wigner said, don’t worry—Professor Russell
always falls asleep. If Pauli appears to be nodding, don’t assume he
agrees—he nods from palsy. (Pauli could be ruthless in dismissing work
he considered shallow or flimsy: “ganz falsch,” utterly false—or worse, “not
even false.”) Feynman prepared carefully. He collected his notes and put
them into a brown envelope. He entered the seminar room early and
covered the blackboard with equations. While he was writing, he heard a
soft voice behind him. It was Einstein. He was coming to the lecture and
first he wondered whether the young man might direct him to the tea.

Afterward Feynman could remember almost nothing: just the trembling of
his hand as he pulled his notes from the envelope and then a feeling that
his mind put itself at ease by concentrating on the physics and forgetting
the occasion and the personalities. Pauli did object, perhaps sensing that
the use of advanced potentials merely invoked a sort of mathematical
tautology. Then, politely, Pauli said, “Don’t you agree, Professor Einstein?”
Feynman heard that soft Germanic voice again—so pleasant, it seemed—
saying no, the theory seemed possible, perhaps there was a conflict with
the theory of gravitation, but after all the theory of gravitation was not so
well established …

The Reasonable Man

He suffered spells of excessive rationality. When these struck it was not
enough to make progress in his scientific work, nor to rectify his mother’s
checkbook, nor to recompute his own equivocal balance sheet (eighteen
dollars for laundry, ten dollars to send home … ), nor to lecture his friends,
as they watched him repair his bicycle, on the silliness of believing in God
or the supernatural. During one occurrence he wrote out an hourly schedule
of his activities, both scholarly and recreational, “so as to efficiently
distribute my time,” he wrote home. When he finished, he recognized that
no matter how careful he was, he would have to leave some indeterminate
gaps—“hours when I haven’t marked down just what to do but I do what I
feel is most necessary then—or what I am most interested in—whether it
be W.’s problem or reading Kinetic Theory of Gases, etc.” If there is a
disease whose symptom is the belief in the ability of logic to control
vagarious life, it afflicted Feynman, along with his chronic digestive
troubles. Even Arline Greenbaum, sensible as she was, could spark flights
of reason in him. He grew concerned about the potential for emotional
disputes between husbands and wives. Even his own parents fought. He
hated the battles and the anger. He did not see why two intelligent people,
in love with each other, willing to converse openly, should get caught in
arguments. He worked out a plan. Before revealing it to Arline, however, he
decided to lay it out for a physicist friend over a hamburger at a diner on
the Route 1 traffic circle. The plan was this. When Dick and Arline
disagreed intensely about a matter of consequence, they would set aside
a fixed time for discussion, perhaps one hour. If at the end of that time they
had not found a resolution, rather than continue fighting they would agree to
let one of them decide. Because Feynman was older and more
experienced (he explained), he would be the one.

His friend looked at him and laughed. He knew Arline, and he knew what
would really happen. They would argue for an hour, Dick would give up,
and Arline would decide. Feynman’s plan was a sobering example of the
theoretical mind at work.

Arline was visiting more and more often. They would have dinner with the
Wheelers and go for long walks in the rain. She had the rare ability to
embarrass him: she knew where his small vanities were, and she teased
him mercilessly whenever she caught him worrying about other people’s
things might seem. She sent him a box of pencils
opinions—how 

emblazoned, “Richard darling, I love you! Putzie,” and caught him slicing off
the incriminating legend, for fear of inadvertently leaving one on Professor
Wigner’s desk. “What do you care what other people think?” she said
again and again. She knew he prided himself on honesty and
independence, and she held him to his own high standards. It became a
touchstone of their relationship. She mailed him a penny postcard with a
verse written across it:

If you don’t like the things I do

My friend, I say, Pecans to you!
If I irate with pencils new
My bosom pal, Pecans to you!
…
If convention’s mask is borne in view
…
If deep inside sound notions brew
And from without you take your cue
My sorry friend, Pecans to you!

Her words struck home. Meanwhile she had nagging health worries: a
lump seemed to come and go on her neck, and she developed
uncomfortable, unexplained fevers. Her uncle, a physician, had her rub the
lump with a nostrum called omega oil. (This style of treatment had had its
heyday a hundred years before.)

The day after his presentation to the physics colloquium in February,
Richard went up to Cambridge for a meeting of the American Physical
Society, and she took the train from New York to Boston’s South Station to
join him. An old fraternity friend picked her up and they crossed the bridge
to MIT, catching a ride on a horse-drawn junk wagon. They found Richard
in the corridor of building 8, the physics building. He walked by in animated
conversation with a professor. Arline made eye contact with him, but he did
not acknowledge her. She realized that it would be better not to speak.

When Richard returned to the fraternity house that evening he found her
in the living room. He was ebullient; he grabbed her and swung her around,
dancing. “He certainly believes in physical society,” one of the fraternity
boys said. At Wheeler’s prodding Feynman had presented their space-

time electrodynamics a second time, to a broader audience. The talk went
well. After having faced a public of Einstein, Pauli, von Neumann, and
Wigner, he had little to fear from the American Physical Society rank and
file. Still, he worried that he might have bored his listeners by sticking
nervously to his prepared text. There were a few polite questions, and
Wheeler helped answer them.

Feynman had enunciated a set of principles for a theory of interacting

particles. He wrote them out as follows:

1 The acceleration of a point charge is due only to the sum of its
interactions with other charged particles… . A charge does not act
on itself.

2 The force of interaction which one charge exerts on a second is
calculated by means of the Lorentz force formula, in which the fields
are the fields generated by the first charge according to Maxwell’s
equations.

Phrasing the third principle was more difficult. He tried:

3 The fundamental equations are invariant with respect to a change of

the sign of the time …

Then, more directly:

3 The 

fundamental 

(microscopic) phenomena 

in nature are

symmetrical with respect to interchange of past and future.

Pauli, despite his skepticism, understood the power of the last principle.
He pointed out to Feynman and Wheeler that Einstein himself had argued
for an underlying symmetry of past and future in a little-known 1909 paper.
Wheeler needed little encouragement; he made an appointment to call at
the white clapboard house at 112 Mercer Street.

Einstein 

received 

this pair of ambitious young physicists
sympathetically, as he did most scientists who visited in his last years.
They were led into his study. He sat facing them behind his desk. Feynman
was struck by how well the reality matched the legend: a soft, nice man

field equations, with none of 

wearing shoes without socks and a sweater without a shirt. Einstein was
well known to be unhappy with the acausal paradoxes of quantum
mechanics. He now spent much of his time writing screeds on world
government which, from a less revered figure, would have been thought
crackpot. His distaste for the new physics was turning him into, as he
would have it, “an obstinate heretic” and “a sort of petrified object,
rendered blind and deaf by the years.” But the theory Wheeler and
Feynman described was not yet a quantum theory—so far, it used only
classical 
the quantum-mechanical
amendments that they knew would ultimately be necessary—and Einstein
saw no paradox. He, too, he told them, had considered the problem of
retarded and advanced waves. He reminisced about the strange little
paper he had published in 1909, a manifesto of disagreement with a
Swiss colleague, Walter Ritz. Ritz had declared that a proper field theory
should include only retarded solutions, that the time-backward advanced
solutions should simply be declared impermissible, innocent though the
equations looked. Einstein, however, could see no reason to rule out
advanced waves. He argued that the explanation for the arrow of time
could not be found in the basic equations, which truly were reversible.

On his bicycle in Far Rockaway.

Melville, Lucille, Richard, and Joan at the house they shared with Lucille's sister's

family, at 14 New Broadway.

Richard and Arline : left , at Presbyterian Sanatorium.

At Los Alamos: “I opened the safes which contained behind them the entire secret

of the atomic bomb…”

Slouching beside J. Robert Oppenheimer at a Los Alamos meeting: “He is by all

odds the most brilliant young physicist here, and everyone knows this.”

Awaiting the Trinity test: “And we scientists are clever-too clever- care you not
satisfied? Is four square miles in one bomb not enough? Men are still thinking. Just tell
us how big you want it !”

I. I. Rabi (left) and Han s Bethe: Physicists are the Peter Pans of the human race,

Rabi said.

At th e Shelter Island Conference , June 1947: Willis Lamb and John Wheeler ,
standing; Abraham Pais, Feynrnan, and Herman Feshbach, seated; Julian Schwinger,
kneeling.

Jul ian Schwinger : “It seems to be the spirit of Macaulay which takes over, for he
speaks in splendid periods, the carefully architected sentences rolling on, with every
subordinate clause duly closing.”

Feynman and Hideki Yukawa in Kyoto, 1955 : Feynman presented his theory of
superfluidity, the strange , frictionless behavior of liquid helium quantum mech anics writ
large.

At Caltech , before a slide from his original presentation on antiparticles traveling

backward through time.

Victor Weisskopf (left) and Freeman Dyson.

That was Feynman and Wheeler’s view. By insisting on the symmetry of
past and future, they made the combination of retarded and advanced
potentials seem a necessity. In the end, there was an asymmetry in the
universe of their theory—the role of ordinary retarded fields far outweighs
the backward advanced fields—but that asymmetry does not lie in the
equations. It comes about because of the disordered, mixed-up nature of
the surrounding absorber. A tendency toward disorder is the most
universal manifestation of time’s arrow. A movie showing a drop of ink
diffusing in a glass of water looks wrong when run backward. Yet a movie
showing the microscopic motion of any one ink molecule would look the
same backward or forward. The random motions of each ink molecule can
be reversed, but the overall diffusion cannot be. The system is
microscopically reversible, macroscopically irreversible. It is a matter of
chaos and probability. It is not impossible for the ink molecules, randomly

drifting about, someday to reorganize themselves into a droplet. It is just
hopelessly improbable. In Feynman and Wheeler’s universe, the same
kind of improbability guaranteed the direction of time by ensuring disorder
in the absorber. Feynman took pains to spell out the distinction in the
twenty-two-page manuscript he wrote early in 1941:

We must distinguish between two types of irreversibility. A
sequence of natural phenomena will be said to be microscopically
irreversible if the sequence of phenomena reversed in temporal order
in every detail could not possibly occur in nature. If the original
sequence and the reversed in time one have a vastly different order of
probability of occurrence in the macroscopic sense, the phenomena
are said to be macroscopically irreversible… . The present authors
believe that all physical phenomena are microscopically reversible,
and that, therefore, all apparently irreversible phenomena are solely
macroscopically irreversible.

Even now the principle of reversibility seemed startling and dangerous,
defying as it did the sense of one-way time that Newton had implanted in
science. Feynman called his last statement to Wheeler’s attention with a
note: “Prof Wheeler,” he wrote—and then self-consciously crossed out
“Prof”—“This is a rather sweeping statement. Perhaps you don’t agree
with it. RPF.”

Meanwhile Wheeler was searching the literature, and he found several
obscure precedents for their absorber model. Einstein himself pointed out
that H. Tetrode, a German physicist, had published a paper in Zeitschrift
für Physik in 1922 proposing that all radiation be considered an
interaction between a source and an absorber—no absorber, no radiation.
Nor did Tetrode shrink from the tree-falls-in-the-forest consequences of the
idea:

The sun would not radiate if it were alone in space and no other
bodies could absorb its radiation… . If for example I observed through
my telescope yesterday evening that star … 100 light years away,
then not only did I know that the light which it allowed to reach my eye
was emitted 100 years ago, but also the star or individual atoms of it

knew already 100 years ago that I, who then did not even exist, would
view it yesterday evening at such and such a time.

For that matter, the invisible reddened whisper of radiation emitted by a
distant (and in the twenties, unimagined) quasar not one hundred but ten
billion years ago—radiation that passed unimpeded for most of the
universe’s lifetime until finally it struck a semiconducting receiver at the
heart of a giant telescope—this, too, could not have been emitted without
the cooperation of its absorber. Tetrode conceded, “On the last pages we
have let our conjectures go rather far beyond what has mathematically
been proven.” Wheeler found another obscure but provocative remark in
the literature, from Gilbert N. Lewis, a physical chemist who happened to
have coined the word photon. Lewis, too, worried about the seeming
failure of physics to recognize the symmetry between past and future
implied by its own fundamental equations, and for him, too, the past-future
symmetry suggested a source-absorber symmetry in the process of
radiation.

I am going to make the … assumption that an atom never emits
light except to another atom… . it is as absurd to think of light emitted
by one atom regardless of the existence of a receiving atom as it
would be to think of an atom absorbing light without the existence of
light to be absorbed. I propose to eliminate the idea of mere emission
of light and substitute the idea of transmission, or a process of
exchange of energy between two definite atoms… .

Feynman and Wheeler pushed on their theory. They tried to see how far
they could broaden its implications. Many of their attempts led nowhere.
They worked on the problem of gravity in hopes of reducing it to a similar
interaction. They tried to construct a model in which space itself was
eliminated: no coordinates and distances, no geometry or dimension; only
the interactions themselves would matter. These were dead ends. As the
theory developed, however, one feature gained paramount importance. It
proved possible to compute particle interactions according to a principle
of least action.

The approach was precisely the shortcut that Feynman had gone out of

his way to disdain in his first theory course at MIT. For a ball arcing through
the air, the principle of least action made it possible to sidestep the
computation of a trajectory at successive instants of time. Instead one
made use of the knowledge that the final path would be the one that
minimized action, the difference between the ball’s kinetic and potential
energy. In the absorber theory, because the field was no longer an
independent entity, the action of a particle suddenly became a quantity that
made sense. It could be calculated directly from the particle’s motion. And
once again, as though by magic, particles chose the paths for which the
action was smallest. The more Feynman worked with the least-action
approach, the more he felt how different was the physical point of view.
Traditionally one always thought in terms of the flow of time, represented by
differential equations, which captured a change from instant to instant.
Using the principle of least action instead, one developed a bird’s-eye
perspective, envisioning a particle’s path as a whole, all time seen at once.
“We have, instead,” Feynman said later, “a thing that describes the
character of the path throughout all of space and time. The behavior of
nature is determined by saying her whole space-time path has a certain
character.” In college it had seemed too pat a device, too far abstracted
from the true physics. Now it seemed extraordinarily beautiful and not so
abstract after all. His conception of light was still in flux—still not quite a
particle, not quite a wave, still pressing speculatively against the
unresolved infinities of quantum mechanics. The notion had come far since
Euclid wrote, as the first postulate of his Optics, “The rays emitted by the
eye travel in a straight line.”

The empty space of the physicist’s imagination—the chalkboard on
which every motion, every force, every interaction played itself out—had
undergone a transformation in less than a generation. A ball pursued a
trajectory through the everyday space of three dimensions. The particles of
Feynman’s reckoning forged paths through the four-dimensional spacetime so indispensable to the theory of relativity, and through even more
abstract spaces whose coordinate axes stood for quantities other than
distance and time. In space-time even a motionless particle followed a
trajectory, a line extending from past to future. For such a path Minkowski
coined the phrase world-line—“an image, so to speak, of the everlasting
career of the substantial point, a curve in the world… . The whole universe

is seen to resolve itself into similar world-lines.” Science-fiction writers had
already begun to imagine the strange consequences of world-lines twisting
back from the future into the past. No novelist was letting his fantasies
roam as far as Wheeler was, however. One day he called Feynman on the
hall telephone in the Graduate College. Later Feynman remembered the
conversation this way:

—Feynman, I know why all the electrons have the same charge and

the same mass.

—Why?
—Because they are all the same electron! Suppose that all the worldlines which we were ordinarily considering before in time and space
—instead of only going up in time were a tremendous knot, and
then, when we cut through the knot, by the plane corresponding to a
fixed time, we would see many, many world-lines and that would
represent many electrons, except for one thing. If in one section this
is an ordinary electron world-line, in the section in which it reversed
itself and is coming back from the future we have the wrong sign …
and therefore, that part of a path would act like a positron.

The positron, the antiparticle twin of the electron, had been discovered
(in cosmic-ray showers) and named (another modern -tron, short for
positive electron) within the past decade. It was the first antiparticle,
vindicating a prediction of Dirac’s, based on little more than a faith in the
loveliness of his equations. According to the Dirac wave equation, the
energy of a particle amounted to this: ±√something. Out of that plus-orminus sign the positron was born. The positive solution was an electron.
Dirac boldly resisted the temptation to dismiss the negative solution as a
quirk of algebra. Like Wheeler in making his leap toward advanced waves,
he followed a mirror-image change in sign to its natural conclusion.

Feynman considered the wild suggestion coming through the earpiece
of his telephone—that all creation is a slice through the spaghetti path of a
single electron—and offered the mildest of the many possible rebuttals.
The forward and backward paths did not seem to match up. An
embroidery needle pulling a single thread back and forth through a canvas
must go back as many times as it goes forth.

—But, Professor, there aren’t as many positrons as electrons.
—Well, maybe they are hidden in the protons or something.

Wheeler was still trying to make the electron the basis of all other particles.
Feynman let it pass. The point about positrons, however, reverberated. In
his first published paper two years before, on the scattering of cosmic
radiation by stars, he had already made this connection, treating
antiparticles as ordinary particles 
In a
Minkowskian universe, why shouldn’t the reversal apply to time as well as
to space?

following reversed paths. 

Mr. X and the Nature of Time

Twenty years later, in 1963, the problem of time having given up none of its
mystery, a group of twenty-two physicists, cosmologists, mathematicians,
and others sat around a table at Cornell to discuss the matter. Was time a
quantity entered in the account books of their equations to mark the
amount of before and after? Or it was an all-enveloping flow, carrying
everything with it like a constant river? In either case, what did it mean to
say now? Einstein had worried about this, accepting the unwelcome
possibility that the present belongs to our minds alone and that science
cannot comprehend it. A philosopher, Adolph Grünbaum, argued that the
usual notion of the forward flow of time was merely an illusion, a
“pseudoconception.” If it seemed to us as conscious entities that new
events kept “coming into being,” that was merely one of the quirky
consequences of the existence of conscious entities—“organisms which
conceptually register (ideationally represent)” them. Physicists need not
worry about it unduly.

When Grünbaum finished his presentation, a participant with a loathing
for what he viewed as philosophical and psychological vagueness began a
hard cross-examination. (The published version of 
the discussion
identified this interlocutor only as “Mr. X,” which fooled no one; by now,
Feynman hiding behind such a cloak made himself as conspicuous as an
American secretary of state quoted as “a senior official aboard the

secretary of state’s plane.”)

GRÜNBAUM: I want to say that there is a difference between a

conscious thing and an unconscious thing.

X: What is that difference?
GRÜNBAUM: Well, I don’t have more precise words in which to say this,
but I would not be worried if a computer is unemployed. If a human
being is unemployed, I would worry about the sorrows which that
in virtue of conceptualized selfhuman being experiences 
awareness.

X: Are dogs conscious?
GRÜNBAUM: Well, yes. It is going to be a question of degree. But I

wonder whether they have conceptualized awareness.

X: Are cockroaches conscious?
GRÜNBAUM: Well, I don’t know about the nervous system of the

cockroach.

X: Well, they don’t suffer from unemployment.

It seemed to Feynman that a robust conception of “now” ought not to
depend on murky notions of mentalism. The minds of humans are
manifestations of physical law, too, he pointed out. Whatever hidden brain
machinery created Grünbaum’s coming into being must have to do with a
correlation between events in two regions of space—the one inside the
cranium and the other elsewhere “on the space-time diagram.” In theory
one should be able to create a feeling of nowness in a sufficiently
elaborate machine, said Mr. X.

One’s sense of the now feels subjective, arbitrary, open to differences of
definition and interpretation, particularly in the age of relativity. “One can
say easily enough that any particular value of t can be taken as now and
that would not be wrong, but it does not correspond to experience,” the
physicist David Park has said. “If we attend only to what is happening
around us and let ourselves live, our attention concentrates itself on one
moment of time. Now is when we think what we think and do what we do.”
For similar reasons many philosophers wished to banish the concept.
Feynman, staking out a characteristic position in such debates, rejected
the idea that human consciousness was special. He and other rigorous

scientists, their tolerance broadened by their experience with quantummechanical measurement problems, found that they could live with the
imprecision—the possibility that the nows of different observers would
differ in timing and duration. Technology offered ways of tightening the
definition, at least for the sake of argument: less subjectivity arose in the
now recorded by a camera shutter or a computing machine. Wheeler, also
present at the Cornell meeting, proposed the example of a computer on an
antiaircraft gun. Its now is the finite interval containing not just the
immediate past, the few moments of data coming from the radar tracks,
but the immediate future, the flight of the target plane as extrapolated from
the data. Our memories, too, blend the immediate past with the
anticipation of the soon to be, and a living amalgam of these—not some
infinitesimal pointlike instant forever fleeing out of reach—is our now.
Wheeler quoted the White Queen’s remark to Alice: “It’s a poor sort of
memory that only works backwards.”

The absorber theory of Wheeler and Feynman had by then lost the
interest of an increasingly single-minded particle physics, but it held center
stage in this eclectic gathering. It had been born of their concern with
reversible and irreversible processes, and now it served as common
ground for three different approaches to understanding time’s flow, the
arrow of time. As particle physicists had passed the absorber theory by, a
new generation of cosmologists had taken it up. Their field had begun a
transition from mere stargazing astronomy to an enterprise asking the
grandest questions about the universe: whence and wherefore. It was
beginning to stand out among the modern sciences as an enterprise not
fully scientific, but an amalgam of philosophy, art, faith, and not a little hope.
They had so few windows through the murky atmosphere—a few
overworked glass contraptions on mountain tops, a few radio antennae—
yet they believed they could peer far enough, or guess shrewdly enough, to
uncover the origins of space and time. Already their space was not the flat,
neutral stuff of their parents’ pre-Einsteinian intuition, but an eerily plastic
medium that somehow embodied both time and gravity. Some of them, but
not all, believed that space was expanding at high speed and dragging its
contents farther and farther apart, on account of an explosive big bang ten
or fifteen billion years before. It no longer seemed safe to assume that the
universe was the same everywhere, infinite, static, Euclidean, ageless, and

homogeneous: world without end, amen. The strongest evidence for an
expanding universe was still, in 1963, Edwin Hubble’s 1929 discovery that
other galaxies are streaming away from ours, and that the farther away
they are, the faster they seem to be moving. Whether this expansion would
continue forever or whether it would reverse itself was—and would remain
—an open question. Perhaps the universe bloomed and collapsed again
and again in a cycle that ran through eternity.

The issue seemed linked to the nature of time itself. Assumptions about
time were built into the equations for the particle interactions that led to the
creation and dissipation of light. If one thought about time as Wheeler and
Feynman had, one could not escape a cosmic connection between these
intimate interactions and the process of universal expansion. As Hermann
Bondi said at the meeting’s outset, “This process leads to the dark night
sky, to the disequilibrium between matter and radiation, and to the fact that
radiated energy is effectively lost … we accept a very close connection
between cosmology and the basic structure of our physics.” By their
boldness in constructing a time-symmetrical theory of half advanced and
half retarded waves, Wheeler and Feynman had been forced into boldness
of a cosmological sort. If the equations were to balance properly, they had
to make the mathematical assumption that all radiation was eventually
absorbed somewhere. A beam of light heading forever into an eternal
future, never to cross paths with a substance that would absorb it, would
violate their assumption, so their theory mandated a certain kind of
universe. If the universe were to expand forever, conceivably its matter
might so thin out that light would not be absorbed.

Physicists had learned to distinguish three arrows of time. Feynman
described them: the thermodynamic or “accidents of life” arrow; the
radiation or “retarded or advanced” arrow; and the cosmological arrow. He
suggested keeping in mind three physical pictures: a tank with blue water
on one side and clear water on the other; an antenna with a charge moving
toward it or away; and distant nebulas moving together or apart. The
connections between these arrows were connections between the
pictures. If a film showed the water getting more and more mixed, must it
also show the radiation leaving the antenna and the nebulas drifting apart?
Did one form of time govern the others? His listeners could only speculate,
and speculate they did.

“It’s a very interesting thing in physics,” said Mr. X, “that the laws tell us
about permissible universes, whereas we only have one universe to
describe.”

Least Action in Quantum Mechanics

Omega oil did nothing for Arline’s lumps and fevers, and she was admitted
to the hospital in Far Rockaway with what her doctor feared was typhoid.
Feynman began to glimpse the special powerlessness that medical
uncertainty can inflict on a scientific person. He had come to believe that
the scientific way of thinking brought a measure of calmness and control in
difficult situations—but not now. However remotely, medicine was a part of
the domain of knowledge he considered his. It belonged to science. At one
time his father had hopefully studied a kind of medicine. Lately Richard
had been sitting in on a physiology course, learning some basic anatomy.
He read up on typhoid fever in Princeton’s library, and when he visited
Arline in the hospital he started questioning the doctor. Had a Widal test
been administered? Yes. The results? Negative. Then how could it be
typhoid? Why were all of Arline’s friends and relatives wearing gowns to
protect against supposed bacteria that even a sensitive laboratory test
could not detect? What did the mysterious lumps appearing and
disappearing in her neck and armpit have to do with typhoid? The doctor
resented his questions. Arline’s parents pointed out that his status as
fiancé did not entitle him to interfere in her medical care. He backed down.
Arline seemed to recover.

With Wheeler, meanwhile, Feynman was trying to move their work a
crucial step forward. So far, despite its modern, acausal flavor, it was a
classical theory, not a quantum one. It treated objects as objects, not as
probabilistic smudges. It treated energy as a continuous phenomenon,
where quantum mechanics required discrete packets and indivisible jumps
in well-defined circumstances. The problem of self-energy was as severe
in classical electrodynamics as in quantum theory. Unwanted infinities
predated the quantum. They appeared as soon as one faced the
consequences of a pointlike electron. It was as simple as dividing by zero.
Feynman had felt from the beginning that the natural route would be to start

with the classical case and only then work toward a quantized
electrodynamics. There were already standard recipes for translating
classical models into their modern quantum cousins. One prescription was
to take all the momentum variables and replace them with certain more
complicated expressions. The problem was 
in Wheeler and
Feynman’s theory there were no momentum variables. Feynman had
eliminated them in creating his simplified framework based on the
principle of least action.

that 

Sometimes Wheeler told Feynman not to bother—that he had already
solved the problem. Later in the spring of 1941 he went so far as to
schedule a presentation of the quantized theory at the Princeton physics
colloquium. Pauli, still dubious, buttonholed Feynman on his way into
Palmer Library one day. He asked what Wheeler was planning to say.
Feynman said he didn’t know.

“Oh?” Pauli said. “The professor doesn’t tell his assistant how he has it

worked out? Maybe the professor hasn’t got it worked out.”

Pauli was right. Wheeler canceled the lecture. He lost none of his
enthusiasm, however, and made plans for not one but a grand series of
five papers. Feynman, meanwhile, had a doctoral thesis to prepare. He
decided to approach the quantizing of his theory just as he had
approached complicated problems at MIT, by working out cases that were
stripped to their bare essentials. He tried calculating the interaction of a
pair of harmonic oscillators, coupled, with a time delay—just a pair of
idealized springs. One spring would shake, sending out a pure sine wave.
The other would bounce back, and out of their interaction new wave forms
would evolve. Feynman made some progress but could not understand the
quantum version. He had gone too far in the direction of simplicity.

Conventional quantum mechanics went from present to future by the
solving of differential equations—the so-called Hamiltonian method.
Physicists spoke of “finding a Hamiltonian” for a system: if they could find
one, then they could go ahead and calculate; if not, they were helpless. In
Wheeler and Feynman’s view of direct action at a distance, the
Hamiltonian method had no place. That was because of the introduction of
time delays. It was not enough merely to write down a complete description
of the present: the positions, momentums, and other quantities. One never
knew when some delayed effect would hurtle into the picture out of the past

(or in the case of Wheeler and Feynman, out of the future). Because past
and future interacted, the customary differential-equation point of view
broke down. The alternative least-action or Lagrangian approach was no
luxury. It was a necessity.

With all this on his mind, Feynman went to a beer party at the Nassau
Tavern. He sat with a physicist lately arrived from Europe, Herbert Jehle, a
former student of Schrödinger in Berlin, a Quaker, and a survivor of prison
camps in both Germany and France. The American scientific world was
absorbing such refugees rapidly now, and the turmoil of Europe seemed
more palpable and near. Jehle asked Feynman what he was working on.
Feynman explained and asked in turn whether Jehle knew of any
application of the least-action principle in quantum mechanics.

Jehle certainly did. He pointed out that Feynman’s own hero, Dirac, had
published a paper on just that subject eight years before. The next day
Jehle and Feynman looked at it together in the library. It was short. They
found it, “The Lagrangian in Quantum Mechanics,” in the bound volumes of
Physikalische Zeitschrift der Sowjetunion, not the best-read of journals.
Dirac had worked out the beginnings of a least-action approach in just the
style Feynman was seeking, a way of treating the probability of a particle’s
entire path over time. Dirac considered only one detail, a piece of
mathematics for carrying the wave function—the packet of quantummechanical knowledge—forward in time by an infinitesimal amount, a
mere instant.

Infinitesimal time did not amount to much, but it was the starting point of
the calculus. That limitation was not what troubled Feynman. As he looked
over the few bound pages, he kept stopping at a single word: analogue. “A
very simple quantum analogue,” Dirac had written. “… They have their
classical analogues… . It is now easy to see what the quantum analogue of
all this must be.” What kind of word was that, Feynman wondered, in a
paper on physics? If two expressions were analogous, did it mean they
were equal?

No, Jehle, said—surely Dirac had not meant that they were equal.
Feynman found a blackboard and started working through the formulas.
Jehle was right: they were not equal. So he tried adding a multiplication
constant. Calculating more rapidly than Jehle could follow, he substituted
terms, jumped from one equation to the next, and suddenly produced

something extremely familiar: the Schrödinger equation. There was the link
between Feynman’s Lagrangian-style formulation and the standard wave
function of quantum mechanics. A surprise—by analogous Dirac had
simply meant proportional.

But now Jehle had produced a small notebook. He was rapidly copying
from Feynman’s blackboard work. He told Feynman that Dirac had meant
no such thing. In his view Dirac’s idea had been strictly metaphorical; the
Englishman had not meant to suggest that the approach was useful. Jehle
told Feynman he had made an important discovery. He was struck by the
unabashed pragmatism in Feynman’s handling of the mathematics, so
different 
tone. “You
from Dirac’s more detached, more aesthetic 
Americans!” he said. “Always trying to find a use for something.”

The Aura

This was Richard Feynman nearing the crest of his powers. At twenty-three
he was a few years shy of the time when his vision would sweep hawklike
across the breadth of physics, but there may now have been no physicist
on earth who could match his exuberant command over the native
materials of theoretical science. It was not just a facility at mathematics
(though it had become clear to the senior physicists at Princeton that the
mathematical machinery emerging in the Wheeler-Feynman collaboration
was beyond Wheeler’s own ability). Feynman seemed to possess a
frightening ease with the substance behind the equations, like Einstein at
the same age, like the Soviet physicist Lev Landau—but few others. He
was a sculptor who sleeps and dreams with the feeling of clay alive in his
fingers. Graduate students and instructors found themselves wandering
over to the afternoon tea at Fine Hall with Feynman on their minds. They
anticipated his bantering with Tukey and the other mathematicians, his
spinning of half-serious physical theories. Handed an idea, he always had
a question that seemed to pierce toward the essence. Robert R. Wilson,
an experimentalist who arrived at Princeton from the famous cauldron of
Ernest Lawrence’s Berkeley laboratory, talked casually with Feynman only
a few times before making a mental note: Here is a great man.

The Feynman aura—as it had already become—was strictly local.

Feynman had not yet finished his second year of graduate school. He
remained ignorant of the basic literature and unwilling even to read through
the papers of Dirac or Bohr. This was now deliberate. In preparing for his
oral qualifying examination, a rite of passage for every graduate student,
he chose not to study the outlines of known physics. Instead he went up to
MIT, where he could be alone, and opened a fresh notebook. On the title
page he wrote: Notebook Of Things I Don’t Know About. For the first but
not the last time he reorganized his knowledge. He worked for weeks at
disassembling each branch of physics, oiling the parts, and putting them
back together, looking all the while for the raw edges and inconsistencies.
He tried to find the essential kernels of each subject. When he was done
he had a notebook of which he was especially proud. It was not much use
in preparing for the examination, as it turned out. Feynman was asked
which color was at the top of a rainbow; he almost got that wrong,
reversing in his mind the curve of refraction index against wavelength. The
mathematical physicist H. P. Robertson asked a clever question about
relativity, involving the apparent path of the earth as viewed through a
telescope from a distant star. Feynman did get that wrong, he realized
later, but in the meantime he persuaded the professor that his answer was
correct. Wheeler read a statement from a standard text on optics, that the
light from a hundred atoms, randomly phased, would have fifty times the
intensity of one atom, and asked for the derivation. Feynman saw that this
was a trick. He replied that the textbook must be wrong, because by the
same logic a pair of atoms would glow with the same intensity as one. All
this was a formality. Princeton’s senior physicists understood what they
had in Feynman. In writing up course notes on nuclear physics, Feynman
had been frustrated by a complicated formula of Wigner’s for particles in
the nucleus. He did not understand it. So he worked the problem out for
himself, inventing a diagram—a harbinger of things to come—that enabled
him to keep a tally of particle interactions, counting the neutrons and
protons and arranging them in a group-theoretical way according to pairs
that were or were not symmetrical. The diagram bore an odd resemblance
to the diagrams he invented for understanding the pathways of foldedpaper flexagons. He did not really understand why his scheme worked, but
he was certain that it did, and it proved to be a considerable simplification
of Wigner’s own approach.

In high school he had not solved Euclidean geometry problems by
tracking proofs through a logical sequence, step by step. He had
manipulated the diagrams in his mind: he anchored some points and let
others float, imagined some lines as stiff rods and others as stretchable
bands, and let the shapes slide until he could see what the result must be.
These mental constructs flowed more freely than any real apparatus could.
Now, having assimilated a corpus of physical knowledge and
mathematical technique, Feynman worked the same way. The lines and
vertices floating in the space of his mind now stood for complex symbols
and operators. They had a recursive depth; he could focus on them and
expand them into more complex expressions, made up of more complex
expressions still. He could slide them and rearrange them, anchor fixed
points and stretch the space in which they were embedded. Some mental
operations required shifts in the frame of reference, reorientations in
space and time. The perspective would change from motionlessness to
steady motion to acceleration. It was said of Feynman that he had an
extraordinary physical intuition, but that alone did not account for his
analytic power. He melded together a sense of forces with his knowledge
of the algebraic operations that represented them. The calculus, the
symbols, the operators had for him almost as tangible a reality as the
physical quantities on which they worked. Just as some people see
numerals in color in their mind’s eye, Feynman associated colors with the
abstract variables of the formulas he understood so intimately. “As I’m
talking,” he once said, “I see vague pictures of Bessel functions from
Jahnke and Emde’s book, with light tan j’s, slightly violet-bluish n’s, and
dark brown x’s flying around. And I wonder what the hell it must look like to
the students.”

In the past eight years neither Dirac nor any other physicist had been
able to follow up on the notion of a Lagrangian in quantum mechanics—a
way of expressing a particle’s history in terms of the quantity of action. Now
Dirac’s idea served as an explosive release in Feynman’s imagination.
The uneasy elements of quantum mechanics broke loose and rearranged
themselves into a radically new formulation. Where Dirac had pointed the
way to calculating how the wave function would evolve in an infinitesimal
slice of time, Feynman needed to carry the wave function farther, through
finite time. A considerable barrier separated the infinitesimal from the

finite. Making use of Dirac’s infinitesimal slice required a piling up of many
steps—infinitely many of them. Each step required an integration, a
summing of algebraic quantities. In Feynman’s mind a sequence of
multiplications and compounded integrals took form. He considered the
coordinates that specify a particle’s position. They churned through his
compound integral. The quantity that emerged was, once again, a form of
the action. To produce it, Feynman realized, he had to make a complex
integral encompassing every possible coordinate through which a particle
could move. The result was a kind of sum of probabilities—yet not quite
probabilities, because quantum mechanics required a more abstract
quantity called 
the
contributions of every conceivable path from the starting position to the
final position—though at first he saw more a haystack of coordinate
positions than a set of distinct paths. Even so, he realized that he had
burrowed back to first principles and found a new formulation of quantum
mechanics. He could not see where it would lead. Already, however, his
sense of paths in space-time seemed somehow cleaner—more direct.
There seemed something quaint now about the peculiarly constrained
oscillations of the post-ethereal field, the wavy inheritance of the 1920s.

the probability amplitude. Feynman summed 

The White Plague

Twentieth-century medicine was struggling for the scientific footing that
physics began to achieve in the seventeenth century. Its practitioners
wielded the authority granted to healers throughout human history; they
spoke a specialized language and wore the mantle of professional schools
and societies; but their knowledge was a pastiche of folk wisdom and
quasi-scientific fads. Few medical researchers understood the rudiments
of controlled statistical experimentation. Authorities argued for or against
particular therapies roughly the way theologians argued for or against their
theories, by employing a combination of personal experience, abstract
reason, and aesthetic judgment. Mathematics played no role in a
biologist’s education. The human body was still largely a black box, its
contents accessible only by means of the surgeon’s knife or the
crepuscular outlines of the early X rays. Researchers were stumbling

toward the first rudimentary understanding of diet. The modern-sounding
w o r d vitamin had been coined and a few examples isolated in
laboratories, but Feynman’s father, Melville, having been diagnosed with
chronic high blood pressure, was being slowly poisoned with an enriched,
salty diet of eggs, milk, and cheese. Immunology and genetics were
nothing but wells of ignorance. The prevailing theory of the mind was less a
science than a collection of literary conceits blended with the therapeutic
palliative of the confessional. Cancers, viruses, and diseases of the heart
and brain resisted even the first glimmers of understanding. They would
continue to mock medical science throughout the century.

Yet medicine was within reach of its first planetwide triumphs against
bacterial epidemics, with the twin weapons of vaccination and antibiotic
drugs. The year Feynman entered graduate school, Jonas Salk became a
medical doctor; his assault on polio was just a few years away. Still, the
habits of large clinical trials and statistical thinking had yet to become
engrained in medical research. Alexander Fleming had noticed the
antibacterial effect of the mold Penicillium notatum a decade before and
then failed to take what a later era would consider the obvious next steps.
He published his observation in a paper titled “A Medium for the Isolation
of Pfeiffer’s Bacillus.” He tried rubbing his mold onto the open wounds of a
few patients, with unclear results, but it never occurred to him to attempt a
systematic study of its effects. A full decade passed, while biologists (and
Fleming himself) dreamed futilely of a magic antibacterial agent that would
save millions of lives, before finally two researchers happened upon his
paper, extracted penicillin, and in 1940 crossed the line separating
anecdote from science: they injected it into four sick mice, leaving another
four untreated. In the context of 1930s medical science the lost decade
was hardly noteworthy. Fleming’s contemporaries did not deride him as a
bungler. They hailed him as a hero and awarded him the Nobel Prize.

Tuberculosis—consumption, the wasting disease, scrofula, phthisis, the
white plague—killed more people at its prime, in more parts of the globe,
than any other disease. To novelists and poets it carried a romantic aura. It
was a disease of pale aesthetes. It was a disease of rarefaction, of the
body squandering itself. Its long, slow fevers gave the false impression of
life intensified, the metabolism heightened, the processes of existence
stimulated. Thomas Mann, allowing tuberculosis to inspire his most famous

novel, associated the ruin and inflammation of the tubercles with sin, with
the Fall, with the creation of life itself from cool inorganic molecules—“that
pathologically luxuriant morbid growth, produced by the irritant of some
unknown infiltration … an intoxication, a heightening and unlicensed
accentuation of the physical state.” He wrote those words in 1924, when
the Magic Mountain resort-style sanatoriums of Europe were already
dinosaurs of the past. To American public-health authorities faced with the
reality of the disease, even then tuberculosis was more simply a disease
of the poor.

Tuberculosis had infected Arline Greenbaum’s lymphatic system,
perhaps having been carried by unpasteurized milk. Swelling reappeared
in the lymph nodes on her neck and elsewhere, the lumps rubbery and
painless. She suffered fevers and fatigue. But an accurate diagnosis
remained beyond the abilities of her doctors. Arline did not strike them as
the typical tuberculosis victim; she was not poor enough or young enough.
Nor was lymphatic tuberculosis as common as tuberculosis that began in
the lung (it was twenty to thirty times rarer). When they abandoned the
notion of typhoid fever and considered the other standard possibilities,
they focused on cancerous outbreaks: lymphoma, lymphosarcoma,
Hodgkin’s disease.

Feynman was back in the library at Princeton, reading everything he
could find. One standard book listed the possibilities. First was local
infection. This was out of the question because the swellings were traveling
too far. Second was lymphatic tuberculosis. This was easy to diagnose,
the book said. Then came the cancers, and these, he read to his horror,
were almost invariably fatal. For a moment he mocked himself for jumping
to the most morbid possibility. Everyone who reads such catalogues must
start thinking about death, he thought. He went off to the Fine Hall tea,
where the conversation seemed unnaturally normal.

Those months in 1941 were a blur of visits to hospitals, symptoms
appearing and fading, consultations with more and more doctors. He
hovered on the outside, hearing most news secondhand through Arline’s
parents. He and Arline promised each other that they would face whatever
came, bravely and honestly. Arline insisted, as she had when less was at
stake, that honesty was the bedrock of their love and that what she
treasured in Richard was his eagerness to confront the truth, his

unwillingness to be embarrassed or evasive. She said she did not want
euphemisms or pretense about her illness. Few patients did, but the
weight of medical practice opposed forthrightness in the face of terminal
illness. Honest bad news was considered antitherapeutic. Richard faced a
dilemma, because the doctors were finally settling on a grim diagnosis of
Hodgkin’s disease. There would be periods of remission, they said, but
the course of the illness could not be reversed.

For Arline’s benefit they proposed a camouflage diagnosis of “glandular
fever.” Richard refused to go along with it. He explained that he and Arline
had a pact—no lies, not even white ones. How would he be able to face
her with this biggest lie of all?

His parents, Arline’s parents, and the doctors all urged him not to be so
cruel as to tell a young woman she was dying. His sister, Joan, sobbing,
told him he was stubborn and heartless. He broke down and bowed to
tradition. In her room at Farmingdale Hospital, with her parents at her side,
he confirmed that she had glandular fever. Meanwhile, he started carrying
around a letter—a “goodbye love letter,” as he called it—that he planned to
give her when she discovered the truth. He was sure she would never
forgive the unforgivable lie.

He did not have long to wait. Soon after Arline returned home from the
hospital she crept to the top of the stairs and overheard her mother
weeping with a neighbor down in the kitchen. When she confronted
Richard—his letter snug in his pocket—he told her the truth, handed her the
letter, and asked her to marry him.

Marriage was not so simple. It had not occurred to universities like
Princeton to leave such matters to their students’ discretion. The financial
and emotional responsibilities were considered grave in the best of
circumstances. He was supporting himself as a graduate student with
fellowships—he was the Queen Junior Fellow and then the Charlotte
Elizabeth Proctor Fellow, entitling him to earn two hundred dollars a year
as a research assistant. When he told a university dean that his fiancée
was dying and that he wanted to marry her, the dean refused to permit it
and warned him that his fellowship would be revoked. There would be no
compromise. He was dismayed at the response. He considered leaving
graduate school for a while to find work. Before he made his decision,
more news came from the hospital.

A test had found tuberculosis in Arline’s lymph glands. She did not have
Hodgkin’s disease after all. Tuberculosis was not treatable—or rather it
was treatable by any of dozens of equally ineffectual methods—but its
onslaught was neither swift nor certain. Relief came over Richard in a
flood. To his surprise the first note he heard in Arline’s voice was
disappointment. Now they would have no reason to marry immediately.

Preparing for War

As the spring of 1941 turned to summer, the prospect of war was
everywhere. For scientists it seemed especially real. The fabric of their
international community was already tearing. Refugees from Hitler’s
Europe had been establishing themselves in American universities for
more than half a decade, often in roles of leadership. The latest refugees,
like Herbert Jehle, had increasingly grim stories to tell, of concentration
camps and terror. War work began to swallow up scientists long before the
Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. A Canadian colleague of Feynman’s
returned home to join the Royal Air Force. Others seemed to slip quietly
away: the technologies of war were already drawing scientists into secret
enterprises, as advisers, engineers, and members of 
technical
subcommittees. It was going to be a physicists’ war. When scientists were
covertly informed about the Battle of Britain, the critical details included the
detection of aircraft by reflected radio pulses—“radar” did not yet have a
name. A few even heard about the breaking of codes by advanced
mathematical techniques and electromechanical devices. Alert physicists
knew from the published record that nuclear fission had been discovered
at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institutes outside Berlin; that great energies could be
released by a reaction that would proceed in a neutron-spawning chain;
that any bomb, however, would require large quantities of a rare uranium
isotope. How large? A number in the air at Princeton was 100 kilograms,
more than the weight of a man. That seemed forbidding. Not so much as a
grain of uranium 235 existed in pure form. The world’s only experience in
separating radioactive isotopes on a scale greater than the microscopic
was in Norway—now a German colony—where a distilling plant tediously
produced “heavy,” deuterium-enriched, water. And uranium was not water.

tidbits 

Scientists picked up 

from casual conversation or 

found
themselves fortuitously introduced into inner circles of secret activity. While
Feynman remained mostly oblivious, his senior professor Eugene Wigner
had for two years been a part of “the Hungarian conspiracy,” with Leo
Szilard and Edward Teller, conniving to alert Einstein and through him
President Franklin D. Roosevelt to the possibility of a bomb. (“I never
thought of that!” Einstein had told Wigner and Szilard.) Another Princeton
instructor, Robert Wilson, had been drawn in by a sequence that began
with a telegram from his old mentor at the Berkeley cyclotron, Ernest
Lawrence. At MIT, under cover of a conventional scientific meeting, Wilson
and several other physicists learned about the new Radiation Laboratory,
already called the Rad Lab, formed to turn the nascent British experience
with radar into a technology that would guide ships, aim guns, hunt
submarines, and altogether transform the nature of war. The idea was to
beam radio waves in pulses so strong that targets would send back
detectable echoes. Radar had begun at wavelengths of more than thirty
feet, which meant fuzzy resolution and huge antennae. Clearly a practical
radar would need wavelengths measured in inches, down toward the
microwave region. The laboratory would have to invent a new electronics
combining higher intensities, higher frequencies, and smaller hardware
than anything in their experience. The British had invented a “magnetron”
producing a microwave beam so concentrated that it could light cigarettes
—enough to confound the Americans. (“It’s simple—it’s just a kind of
whistle,” I. I. Rabi told one of the first groups of physicists to gather uneasily
around the British prototype. One of them snapped back, “Okay, Rabi, how
does a whistle work?”) These scientists acted long before the American
public accepted the inevitability of the conflict. Wilson agreed to join the
Rad Lab, though he had considered himself a pacifist at Berkeley. But
when he tried to leave Princeton, Wigner and the department chairman,
Smyth, decided it was time for another initiation. They told Wilson that
Princeton would soon take on a project to create a nuclear reactor, and
they told him why.

Fueling the prewar collaboration of scientists and weapons makers was
a patriotic ethos that no subsequent war would command. It easily
overcame Wilson’s pacifism. Feynman himself visited an army recruitment
office and offered to join the Signal Corps. When he was told he would

have to start with unspecialized basic training—no promises—he backed
down. That spring, in 1941, after three years of frustration, he finally got a
job offer from Bell Laboratories in New York, and he wanted to accept.
When his friend William Shockley showed him around, he was thrilled by
the atmosphere of smart, practical science in action. From their windows
the Bell researchers could see the George Washington Bridge going up
across the Hudson River, and they had traced the curve of the first cable on
the glass. As the bridge was hung from it, they were marking off the slight
changes that transformed the curve from a catenary to a parabola.
Feynman thought it was just the sort of clever thing he might have done.
Still, when a recruiter from the Frankford Arsenal nearby in Philadelphia—
an army general—visited Princeton seeking physicists, Feynman did not
hesitate to turn down Bell Laboratories and sign up with the army for the
summer. It was a chance to serve his country.

In one way or another, by the time the United States entered the war in
December, one-fourth of the nation’s seven-thousand-odd physicists had
joined a diffuse but rapidly solidifying military-research establishment. A
generation brought up with the understanding that science meant progress,
the harnessing of knowledge and the empowerment of humanity, now
found a broad national purpose. A partnership was already forming
between the federal establishment and the leaders of scientific institutions.
The government created in the summer of 1941 an Office of Scientific
Research and Development, subsuming the National Defense Research
Committee, charged with coordinating research in what MIT’s president,
Karl Compton, the epitome of the new partnership, called “the field of
mechanisms, devices, instrumentalities and materials of warfare.” Not just
radar and explosives but calculating machines and battlefield medicines
occupied the urgent war effort. An area like artillery was no longer a matter
of haphazard trial-and-error lobbing of randomly designed shells. The
nuclear physicist Hans Bethe had turned on his own initiative to a nascent
theory of armor penetration; he also took on the issue of the supersonic
shock waves that would shudder from the edge of a projectile. Less
glamorously, Feynman spent his summer at the Frankford Arsenal working
on a primitive sort of analog computer, a combination of gears and cams
designed to aim artillery pieces. It all seemed mechanical and archaic—
later he thought Bell Laboratories would have been a better choice after all.

Still, even in his college workshops, he had never confronted such an
urgent blending of mathematics and metal. To aim a gun turret meant
converting sines and tangents into steel gears. Suddenly trigonometry had
engineering consequences: long before the tangent of a near-vertical turret
diverged to infinity, the torque applied to the teeth of the gears would snap
them off. Feynman found himself drawn to a mathematical approach he
had never considered, the manipulation of functional roots. He divided a
sine into five equal subfunctions, so that the function of the function of the
function of the function of the function equaled the sine. And the gears
could handle the load. Before the summer ended he was given a new
problem as well: how to make a similar machine calculate a smooth curve
—the path of an airplane, for example—from a sequence of positions
coming in at regular intervals of a few seconds. Only later did he learn
where this problem had arisen—from radar, the new technology from the
MIT Radiation Laboratory.

After the summer he returned to Princeton, nothing remaining in his
graduate education except the final task of writing his thesis. He worked
slowly, trying out his least-action view of quantum mechanics on a variety of
basic, illustrative problems. He considered the case of two particles or
particle systems, A and B, which do not interact directly but through an
intermediary system with wavelike behavior, a harmonic oscillator, O. A
causes O to oscillate; O in turn acts on B. Complicated time delays enter
the picture because, once O is set in motion, B will feel an influence that
depends on A’s behavior some time in the past—and vice versa. This
case was a carefully reduced version of the familiar problem of two
particles interacting through the mediation of the field. He asked himself in
what circumstances the equations of motion could be derived from a
principle of least action, strictly from the available information about the two
particles A and B, completely disregarding O, the stand-in for the field. The
least-action principle had come to seem like more than merely a useful
shortcut. He now felt that it bore directly on the issues on which physics
traditionally turned, such principles as the conservation of energy.
“This preoccupation with …” he wrote—then reconsidered.
“This desire for a principle of least action is besides the simplicity
gained that, when the motions can be so represented, conservation of
energy, momentum, etc. are guaranteed.”

One morning Wilson came into his office and sat down. Something
secret was going on, he said. He was not supposed to reveal the secret,
but he needed Feynman and there was no other way. Furthermore, there
were no rules about this secret. The military still did not take the physicists
completely seriously. Physicists had decided on their own not to discuss
certain matters, and now Wilson had decided to take it on himself to
discuss one. It was time for Feynman’s initiation.

There was a possibility of a nuclear bomb, Wilson said. British
physicists had heard the message of Bohr and Wheeler about uranium
235 two years earlier and had arrived at a new estimate for the critical
mass of material that would be needed. An expatriate German chemist on
the British team, Franz Simon, had made the Atlantic crossing by “flying
boat” with the latest news from their Birmingham laboratory. Perhaps a
pound or two would be enough. Perhaps even less. The British were
working hard on the problem of separating the uranium isotopes,
winnowing the rare lighter isotope, uranium 235, from the far more
common chaff, uranium 238. The two forms of uranium are chemically
indistinguishable—a chemical reaction sees just one kind of atom. But the
atoms of different isotopes have different masses, a fact that theorists
could exploit in several plausible ways. Simon himself was investigating a
scheme of slow gaseous diffusion through metal foil riddled with pinpoint
holes; the uranium 238 molecules, ever so slightly heavier, would lag
behind as the gas drifted through. Secret committees and directorates
were forming around the uranium problem. The British had a code name:
tube alloy, soon contracted to tubealloy. The Americans were building a
nuclear reactor; other Princeton professors were involved. And Wilson said
he had come up with an idea of his own. He had invented a device—so far
existing only in his head—that he hoped would solve the separation
problem much faster. Where Simon was thinking about holes in metal—
one morning he had gone into his kitchen and attacked a wire strainer with
a hammer—Wilson had in mind a combination of novel electronics and
cyclotron technology.

He had persuaded Harry Smyth to let him assemble a team from among
the instructors, graduate students, and engineers. A sort of countrywide
“body shop” trading in the available technical talent was taking shape with
the help of the National Defense Research Council; that would help him

find some necessary staff. Graduate students were being pressed into
service with the help of a simple expedient—Princeton called a halt to
most degree work. Students were asked to choose from among three warrelated projects: Wilson’s; an effort to develop a new blast gauge for
measuring explosive pressure; and a dully 
irrelevant-sounding
investigation of the thermal properties of graphite. (Only later did it become
clear that this meant the thermal-neutron properties of a material destined
for nuclear reactors.) Wilson wanted to sign Feynman first. It occurred to
him that Feynman’s persistent skepticism, his unwillingness to accept any
assertion on authority, would be useful. If there was any baloney or selfdeception in the idea, he thought, Feynman would find it. He wanted
Feynman in place when he presented the plan to the other graduate
students.

To his dismay Feynman turned him down flat. He was too deep in his
thesis; also, though he did not say so, the Frankford Arsenal had left him
slightly disillusioned with war work. He said that he would keep the secret
but that he wanted no part of it. Wilson asked him at least to come to the
meeting.

Long afterward, after all the bomb makers had taken second looks back
at their moments of decision, Feynman remembered the turmoil of that
afternoon. He had not been able to go back to work. As he recalled it, he
thought about the importance of the project; about Hitler; about saving the
world. Elsewhere a few physicists already guessed, making delicate
inferences from university rosters and published papers, that Germany was
mounting no more than a cursory nuclear-weapons research project. Still,
among the physicists who had disappeared from view was Werner
Heisenberg. The threat seemed real enough. Later Feynman remembered
the decisive physical act of opening his desk drawer and placing in it the
loose sheets of his thesis.

The Manhattan Project

Chicago, Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Hanford: the first outposts of the Manhattan
Project eventually became permanent capitals of a national nuclear
establishment. To produce purified uranium and plutonium on a scale of

mere pounds would require the rapid establishment of the largest singlepurpose industrial enterprise ever. General Electric, Westinghouse, Du
Pont, Allis-Chalmers, Chrysler, Union Carbide, and dozens of smaller
companies combined in an effort that would see giant new factory towns
rising from the earth. Yet in the first uncertain months after the attack on
Pearl Harbor nothing in the modest scale of nuclear research even
remotely foreshadowed the impending transformation of the nation’s warmaking capacity. Workshops were converted according to happenstance
and convenience. At Princeton no more than a few thousand dollars was
available for Wilson’s project. To get help with the electronics he resorted
to throwing a near tantrum in I. I. Rabi’s office at the MIT Rad Lab. Including
shop workers and technicians, his team grew to number about thirty. The
experimental division amounted to one ungainly tube the length of an
automobile, sprouting smaller tubes and electrical wiring. The theoretical
division comprised, in its entirety, two cocky graduate students sitting side
by side at roll-top desks in a small office.

They found they were able to bear the pressure of working on the
nation’s most fateful secret research project. The senior theoretician
crumpled a piece of paper one day, passed it to his assistant, and ordered
him to throw it in the wastebasket.

the distances 

from scientist 

than you.” They measured 

“Why don’t you?” the assistant replied.
“My time is more valuable than yours,” said Feynman. “I’m getting paid
more 
to
wastebasket; multiplied by the wages; bantered about their relative value
to nuclear science. The number-two man, Paul Olum, threw away the
paper. Olum had considered himself 
the best undergraduate
mathematician at Harvard. He arrived at Princeton in 1940 to be
Wheeler’s second research assistant. Wheeler 
to
Feynman, and within a few weeks he was devastated. What’s happening
here? he thought. Is this the way physicists are, and I missed it? No
physicist at Harvard was like this. Feynman, a cheerful, boyish presence
spinning across the campus on his bicycle, scornful of the formalisms of
modern advanced mathematics, was running mental circles around him. It
wasn’t that he was a brilliant calculator; Olum knew the tricks of that game.
It was as if he were a man from Mars. Olum could not track his thinking. He
had never known anyone so intuitively at ease with nature—and with

introduced him 

nature’s seemingly least accessible manifestations. He suspected that
when Feynman wanted to know what an electron would do under given
circumstances he merely asked himself, “If I were an electron, what would I
do?”

Feynman found a vast difference between intuiting the behavior of
electrons in rarefied theoretical contexts and predicting the behavior of a
bulky jury-rigged assemblage of metal and glass tubing and electronics.
He and Olum worked hastily. They could see from the start that Wilson’s
idea sat somewhere near the border between possible and hopeless—but
on which side of the border? The calculations were awkward. Often they
had to resort to guesswork and approximation, and it was hard to see
which pieces of the work could accommodate guesses and which
demanded rigorous exactitude. Feynman realized that he did not
completely trust theoretical physics, now that its procedures were put to
such an unforgiving test. Meanwhile the technicians moved forward; they
could not afford to wait for the theorists’ numbers. It was like a cartoon,
Feynman thought; every time he looked around, the apparatus had
sprouted another tube or a new set of dials.

Wilson called his machine an isotron (a near-meaningless name; his old
mentor, Ernest Lawrence, was calling a competing device a calutron,
California + tron). Of all the separation schemes, Wilson’s isotron owed
the least to ordinary intuition about physical objects. It came the closest to
treating atoms as denizens of a wavy electromagnetic world, rather than
miniature balls to be pushed about or squeezed through holes. The isotron
first vaporized and ionized chunks of uranium—heated them until they gave
up an electron and thus became electrically charged. Then a magnetic field
set them in motion. The stream of atoms passed through a hole that
organized it into a tight beam. Then came the piece of wizardry that set the
isotron apart from all the other separation schemes, the piece Feynman
was struggling to evaluate.

A particularly jagged, sawtooth oscillation would be set up in the
magnetic field. The voltage would swing sharply up and down, at radio
wavelengths. Some of the uranium atoms would hit the field just as the
energy fell to zero. Then some later atoms would enter the field as the
energy rose, and they would accelerate enough to catch up with the first
atoms. Then the energy would fall off again, so that the next atoms would

travel more slowly. The goal was to make the beam break up into bunches,
like traffic clumping on a highway. Wilson estimated that the bunches
would be about a yard long. Most important, the uranium 235 and uranium
238 atoms, because of their differing masses, would accelerate differently
in the magnetic field and would therefore bunch at different points. If the
experimenters could get the timing right, Wilson thought, the bunches of
each isotope should be distinct and separable. As they reached the end of
the tube another precisely timed oscillating field, like a flag man at a
detour, would deflect the bunches alternately left and right into waiting
containers.

Complications appeared. As the ions’ own momentum pushed them
together, their tendency to repel one another came into play. Furthermore
some atoms lost not one but two or more electrons when ionized, doubling
or tripling their electric charge and sabotaging Feynman’s calculations.
When experimenters tried higher voltages than Feynman had initially
calculated, they found that the bunches were springing back, the waves
rebounding and forming secondary waves. It was with something like
shock that Feynman realized that these secondary effects appeared in his
equations, too—if only he could persuade himself to trust them. Nothing
about the isotron project was simple. The physicists had to invent a way of
feeding the machine with uranium powder instead of uranium wire,
because the wire had a tendency to alloy with the electrodes, destroying
them spectacularly. One of the experimenters found that, by setting a flame
to the end of the uranium wire, he could create a shower of dazzling stars
—an unusually expensive sparkler.

Meanwhile the project’s worst enemy was proving to be its closest
competitor, Lawrence, at Berkeley. He wanted to absorb the isotron into
his own project, shutting down the Princeton group and taking on its staff
and equipment for his calutron. The California-tron similarly used the new
accelerator technology to create a beam of uranium ions but accelerated
them instead around a three-foot racetrack. The heavier atoms swung
farther out. The light atoms made the tight turn into a carefully positioned
collector. Or so they would in theory. When General Leslie R. Groves, the
new head of the Manhattan Project, first made the drive up the winding
road from San Francisco Bay to Berkeley’s Radiation Hill, he was
appalled to find that the entire product of Lawrence’s laboratory could

barely be seen without the aid of a magnifying glass. Worse, the
microgram samples were not even half pure. Even so, they outweighed the
total output of the Princeton group. Feynman carried the isotron’s flyspeck
sample by the train to Columbia for analysis late in 1942; Princeton had no
equipment capable of measuring the proportions of the isotopes in a tiny
piece of uranium. Wearing his battered sheepskin coat, he had trouble
finding anyone in the building who would take him seriously. He wandered
around with his radioactive fragment until finally he saw a physicist he
knew, Harold Urey, who took him in hand. Urey was a distinguished
physicist who, as it happened, had delivered the first scientific lecture
Feynman had ever heard, a public talk in Brooklyn on the subject of heavy
water, sharing the bill with the wife of the Belgian balloonist Auguste
Piccard. More recently Feynman had come to know Urey by attending
meetings of the Manhattan Project’s de facto steering committee. In that
way he also met for the first time I. I. Rabi, Richard Tolman, and the
physicist, so like Feynman and yet so unlike him, who would control his
destiny for the next three years, J. Robert Oppenheimer.

Soon after Feynman’s trip to Columbia bearing uranium, these men
made their final decision on Princeton’s adventure with the isotron. On the
recommendation of Lawrence, nominally in charge of all electromagnetic
separation research, they closed the Princeton project down. Operationally
the calutron seemed a full year ahead, and money had to be committed as
well to the more conventional diffusion approach, with pumps and pipes
instead of magnets and fields, the atoms drifting in random trajectories, at
ever-so-slightly different speeds, through many miles of metal barriers
pricked with billions of microscopic holes. Wilson was stunned. He thought
the committee was acting not just hastily but hysterically. To his senior
colleagues it seemed that Wilson had lost to the personal strength and
promotional skill of his former mentor Lawrence. Smyth and Wigner both
felt privately that, given a fuller trial, the isotron might conceivably have
shortened the war. “Lawrence’s calutron simply used raw brute force to pry
the beam a little way apart,” a younger team member said. “Our method
w a s elegant.” Blown up to the scale needed for mass production—
thousands of giant machines—the isotron promised a yield many times
greater. Feynman had produced detailed calculations for the design of a
vast manufacturing plant, with isotrons working in a “cascade” of

increasing purity. He took into account everything from wall-scrapings to
uranium that would be lost in workers’ clothing. He conceived arrays of
several thousand machines—yet that proved a modest scale, in light of the
later reality.

For Feynman one legacy of the Princeton effort was the friendship with
Olum, a friendship, like many that followed, intellectually rich and
emotionally unequal. Encounters with Feynman left marks on a series of
young physicists and mathematicians, in the glare of a bright light, outthought for the first time in their lives. They found different ways of adapting
to this new circumstance. Some subordinated their own abilities to his and
accepted his occasional bantering abuse in exchange for the surprising
pleasure that came with his praise. Some found their self-image enough
changed that they abandoned physics altogether. Olum himself eventually
returned to mathematics, where he was more comfortable. He worked with
Feynman throughout the war and then Feynman drifted away. They met
only a few times in the next forty years. Olum thought of his old friend often,
though. He was president of the University of Oregon when he heard of
Feynman’s death. He realized that the young genius he had met at
Princeton had become a part of him, impossible to extricate. “My wife died
three years ago, also of cancer,” he said.

… I think about her a lot. I have to admit I have Dick’s books and
other things of Dick’s. I have all of the Feynman lectures and other
stuff. And there are things that have pictures of Dick on them. The
article in Science about the Challenger episode. And also some of
the recent books.

I get a terrible feeling every time I look at them. How could someone
like Dick Feynman be dead? This great and wonderful mind. This
extraordinary feeling for things and ability is in the ground and there’s
nothing there anymore.

It’s an awful feeling. And I feel it—— A lot of people have died and I
know about it. My parents are both dead and I had a younger brother
who is dead. But I have this feeling about just two people. About my
wife and about Dick.

I suppose, although this wasn’t quite like childhood, it was graduate
students together, and I do have more—— I don’t know, romantic, or
something, feelings about Dick, and I have trouble realizing that he’s
dead. He was such an extraordinarily special person in the universe.

Finishing Up

Absent from Princeton’s nuclear effort was John Wheeler. He had already
departed for Chicago, where Enrico Fermi and his team at the
Metallurgical Laboratory—that enigmatic 
laboratory employing no
metallurgists—were driving toward the first nuclear reactor. They intended
to use less-than-bomb-grade uranium to produce slow fission. In the spring
of 1942 Chicago was the place where it was easiest to gain a sense of
what the future held. Wheeler knew how deeply his former student was
mired in the isotope-separation work. In March he sent Feynman a
message. It was time to finish his thesis, no matter how many questions
remained open. Wigner—who was also more and more a part of the
Chicago work—agreed that Feynman had accomplished enough for his
degree.

Feynman heard the warning. He requested a short leave from the isotron
project. Even now he did not feel quite ready to write, especially under
such pressure. Later he remembered spending the first day of his leave
lying on the grass, guiltily looking at the sky. Finally, writing with fountain
pen in his fast adolescent scrawl, he filled sheaves of scratch paper—but
paper was expensive, so he used the stationery of the Lawrencian, the
Lawrence High School newspaper (Arline Greenbaum, editor in chief) or
surplus order forms of G. B. Raymond & Company, sewer pipe, flue
linings, etcetera, of Glendale, Long Island. He had now thoroughly
assimilated Wheeler’s revolutionary attitude, the stance that declared a
break with the past. When the quantum mechanics of Max Planck was
applied to the problem of light and the electromagnetic field, he wrote,
“great difficulties have arisen which have not been surmounted
satisfactorily.” Other interactions, with more recently discovered particles,
were creating similar difficulties, he pointed out: “Meson field theories have
been set up in analogy to the electromagnetic field theory. But the analogy

is unfortunately all too perfect; the infinite answers are all too prevalent and
confusing.” So he disposed of the field—at least the old idea of the field as
a free medium for carrying waves. The field is a “derived concept,” he
wrote. “The field in actuality is entirely determined by the particles.” The
field is a mere “mathematical construction.” Just as radically, he
deprecated the wave function of Schrödinger, the now-orthodox means of
describing the full state of a quantum-mechanical system at a given time. It
was practically useless, after all, when the interaction of particles involved
a time delay. “We can take the viewpoint, then, that the wave function is just
a mathematical construction, useful under certain conditions”—no, “certain
particular conditions … but not generally applicable.”

He also took pains to leave his collaboration with Wheeler decisively
behind. He wanted his thesis to be his own; he may already have sensed
that the absorber theory in itself was leading toward a quirky dead end. It
was his conception of the principle of least action that now consumed him.
Wheeler-Feynman had been only a starting point, he wrote. It happened to
provide most of the “illustrative examples” that would fill out the thesis. But
he declared that his least-action method “is in fact independent of that
theory, and is complete in itself.”

When he was done, the first part of the thesis looked deceptively oldfashioned. It worked out some nearly textbook equations for the
description of mechanical systems, such as springs, coupled together by
means of another oscillator. Then this intermediate oscillator disappeared.
A stroke of mathematical ingenuity eliminated it. A shorthand calculation
appeared, very much like the classical Lagrangian. Soon the ground
shifted, and the subject was quantum mechanics. The classical machinery
of the first part turned into something quite modern. Where there had been
two mechanical systems coupled by an oscillator, now there were two
particles interacting through the medium of an oscillating field. The field,
too, was now eliminated. A new quantum electrodynamics arose from a
blank slate.

Feynman concluded with a blunt catalog of the flaws in his thesis. It was
a theory untested by any connection to experiment. (He hoped to find an
application to laboratory problems in the future.) The quantum mechanics
remained nonrelativistic: a working version would have to take into account
the distortions of Newtonian physics that occur near the speed of light.

Above all he felt dissatisfied with the physical meaning of his equations.
He felt they lacked a clear interpretation. Although few concepts in science
seemed more frightening or abstruse than Schrödinger’s wave function, in
fact the wave function had achieved a kind of visualizability for physicists, if
only as a sort of probabilistic smudge at the edge of consciousness.
Feynman acknowledged that his scheme discarded even that fragment of
a mental picture. Measurement was a problem: “In the mathematics we
must describe the system for all times, and if a measurement is going to
be made in the interval of interest, this fact must be put somehow into the
equations from the start.” Time was a problem: his approach required, as
he said, “speaking of states of the system at times very far from the
present.” In the long run this would prove a virtue. For now it seemed to turn
the method into a formalism with no ready physical interpretation. For
Feynman, an unvisualizable formalism was anathema. The official thesis
readers, Wheeler and Wigner, were unperturbed. In June Princeton
awarded Feynman his doctoral degree. He attended the ceremony
wearing the academic gown that had made him so uncomfortable three
years before. He was proud in the presence of his parents. Fleetingly he
was annoyed at sharing the platform with honorary-degree recipients;
always pragmatic, he thought it was like giving an “honorary electrician’s
license” to people who had not done the work. He imagined being offered
such an honor and told himself that he would turn it down.

Graduation removed one obstacle to marriage, but only one. According
to medical and quasi-medical dogma, tuberculosis was a burden on love.
“Should Consumptives Marry?” was the title of a chapter in Dr. Lawrence
F. Flick’s 1903 monograph, Consumption a Curable and Preventable
Disease. Not without gravely weighing the “risks and burdens,” he warned.
And:

The relationship between husband and wife is so intimate that
even with great care there may be given opportunity in moments of
forgetfulness for conveyance of the disease.

And:

Many a young consumptive mother gets her shroud shortly after

she has purchased the christening frock for her babe.

A 1937 Manual of Tuberculosis for Nurses and Public Health Workers
declared that marriage should be forbidden:

Marriage is apt to be a very expensive and dangerous luxury to
those who are suffering, or have recently suffered, from tuberculosis of
the lungs… . If the patient is a woman, she has not only to face the risk
of infecting her husband and her children, but she must take into
consideration the fact that pregnancy is liable to aggravate existing
disease.

As late as 1952 an authoritative text cited Somerset Maugham’s short
story “Sanatorium,” about a young couple in love who disregard the
customary strictures.

They were both so young and brave that it was a great pity… . One
could wish the novelist would rewrite the story with the boy and girl
sensibly waiting for several years… . I am addicted to happy endings.

The textbook phrases gave no hint of the howling whirlpool of emotions that
came when love and tuberculosis combined. Richard’s parents dreaded
his marriage to Arline. Lucille Feynman, especially, found the idea
impossible to bear. Her dealings with her son became harsher as she
realized how serious his intention was. In the late spring she sent him a
cold, handwritten screed bristling with her fear for his health, her fear for his
career, her worry about money, and, indirectly, her revulsion at the
possibility of sexual relations. She held nothing in reserve.

“Your health is in danger, no I should say your life is in danger,” she
wrote. “It is only natural that when you are married you will see more of her.”
She worried about what other people would think (an enemy against which
Richard and Arline were learning to circle the wagons). Tuberculosis
carried a stigma, and the stigma would attach to Richard. “People dread
T.B. When you have a wife in a T.B. sanatorium, no one knows it is not a
real marriage. & I know the world considers such a man dangerous to
associate with.” She told Richard that he was not earning enough money,
that he had been loyal enough already, and that Arline “should be satisfied

with the status of ‘engagement’ instead of ‘marriage,’ because in such a
marriage you are not getting any of the pleasures of marriage, but only the
severe burden.” She warned that she and Melville would not help the
couple with money under any circumstances. She appealed to his
patriotism, saying that the burden of a sick wife would compromise his
ability to serve his country. She reminded him that his grandparents had
fled European persecution and pogroms for a country whose freedom he
took for granted. “Your marriage at this time, seems a selfish thing to do,
just to please one person.” She doubted that he sincerely wanted to marry
Arline; she asked whether he was not merely trying to please her, “just as
you used to occasionally eat spinach to please me.” She said that she
loved him and hated to see him make a noble but useless gesture. She
said, “I was surprised to learn such a marriage is not unlawful. It ought to
be.”

Melville took a calmer tack. He asked Richard to get professional advice
at Princeton, and Richard obeyed, consulting his department chairman,
Smyth, and the university doctor. Smyth merely said he preferred to keep
out of his staff’s private affairs. He kept to that position even when
Feynman went to the extreme of pointing out that he would be in contact
both with a tubercular wife and with students. The doctor was concerned to
make sure that Feynman understood the danger of pregnancy, and
Feynman told him they did not intend to make love. (The doctor noted that
tuberculosis was an infectious rather than a contagious disease, and
Feynman, typically, pressed him on that point. He had a suspicion that the
distinction was an artifact of unscientific medical jargon—that, if there was
a difference at all, it was a difference of degree only.)

He told his father that he and Arline did not plan to marry any time within
the next year. But just a few days later, having received his degree and his
new status, he wrote back to his mother, proudly updating his letterhead by
penning “Ph.D.” after the printed “Richard Feynman.” He tried to respond
reasonably to each argument. Neither Smyth nor the university physician
were concerned about any danger to his health, he said. If marriage to
Arline would be a burden, it was a burden he coveted. He had realized one
day, arranging Arline’s transfer to the sanatorium nearby, that he was
actually singing aloud with the sheer pleasure of planning their life together.
As far as his duty to country was concerned, he would do whatever was

necessary and go wherever he was sent. It was not that he wanted to be
noble, he told his mother. Nor was it that he felt obliged to keep a promise
he had made years before under different circumstances.

Marrying Arline was distinctly different from spinach. He did not like
spinach. Anyway, he said, he had not eaten spinach out of love for his
mother. “You misunderstood my motives as a small boy—I didn’t want you
angry at me.”

He had made up his mind. He moved into a flat at 44 Washington Road
immediately after graduation and for a while did not even tell his mother the
address. He rapidly made the final arrangements—as Arline said, “in no
time flat”:

I guess maybe it is like rolling off of a log—my heart is filled again
& I’m choked with emotions—and love is so good & powerful—it’s
worth preserving—I know nothing can separate us—we’ve stood the
tests of time and our love is as glorious now as the day it was born—
dearest riches have never made people great but love does it every
day—we’re not little people—we’re giants … I know we both have a
future ahead of us—with a world of happiness—now & forever.

With his parents frightened and unreconciled, he borrowed a station
wagon from a Princeton friend, outfitted it with mattresses for the journey,
and picked up Arline in Cedarhurst. She walked down her father’s handpoured concrete driveway wearing a white dress. They crossed New York
Harbor on the Staten Island ferry—their honeymoon ship. They married in a
city office on Staten Island, in the presence of neither family nor friends,
their only witnesses two strangers called in from the next room. Fearful of
contagion, Richard did not kiss her on the lips. After the ceremony he
helped her slowly down the stairs, and onward they drove to Arline’s new
home, a charity hospital in Browns Mills, New Jersey.

LOS ALAMOS

Feynman tinkered with radios again at the century’s big event. Someone
passed around dark welding glass for the eyes. Edward Teller put on sun
lotion and gloves. The bomb makers were ordered to lie face down, their
feet toward ground zero, twenty miles away, where their gadget sat atop a
hundred-foot steel tower. The air was dense. On the way down from the hill
three busloads of scientists had pulled over to wait while one man went
into the bushes to be sick. A moist lightning storm had wracked the New
Mexican desert. Feynman, the youngest of the group leaders, now
grappled more and more urgently with a complicated ten-dial radio
package mounted on an army weapons carrier. The radio was the only link
to the observation plane, and it was not working.

He sweated. He turned the dials with nervous fingers. He knew what
frequency he needed to find, but he asked again anyway. He had almost
missed the bus after having flown back from New York when he received
the urgent coded telegram, and he had not had time to learn what all those
dials did. In frustration he tried rearranging the antenna. Still nothing—
static and silence. Then, suddenly, music, the eerie, sweet sound of a
Tchaikovsky waltz floating irrelevantly from the ether. It was a shortwave
transmission on a nearby frequency, all the way from San Francisco. The
signal gave Feynman a bench mark for his calibrations. He worked the
dials again until he thought he had them right. He reset them to the
airplane’s wavelength one last time. Still nothing. He decided to trust his
calibrations and walk away. Just then a raspy voice broke through the
darkness. The radio had been working all along; the airplane had not been
transmitting. Now Feynman’s radio announced, “Minus thirty minutes.”

Distant searchlights cut the sky, flashing back and forth between the
clouds and the place Feynman knew the tower must be. He tried to see his
flashlight through his welder’s glass and decided, to hell with it, the glass
was too dim. He looked at the people scattered about Campania Hill, like
a movie audience wearing 3-D glasses. A bunch of crazy optimists, he
thought. What made them so sure there would be any light to filter? He

went to the weapons carrier and sat in the front seat; he decided that the
windshield would cut out enough of the dangerous ultraviolet. In the
command center twenty-five miles away, Robert Oppenheimer, thin as a
specter, wearing his tired hat, leaned against a wooden post and said
aloud, “Lord, these affairs are hard on the heart,” as though there had ever
been such an affair.

it seemed 

featureless and 

At 5:29:45 A.M., July 16, 1945, just before dawn would have lighted the
place called (already) the Jornada del Muerto, Journey of Death, instead
came the flash of the atomic bomb. In the next instant Feynman realized
that he was looking at a purple blotch on the floor of the weapons carrier.
His scientific brain told his civilian brain to look up again. The earth was
paper white, and everything on 
twodimensional. The sky began to fade from silver to yellow to orange, the
light bouncing off new-formed clouds in the lee of the shock wave.
Something creates clouds! he thought. An experiment was in progress.
He saw an unexpected glow from ionized air, the molecules stripped of
electrons in the great heat. Around him witnesses were forming memories
to last a lifetime. “And then, without a sound, the sun was shining; or so it
looked,” Otto Frisch recalled afterward. It was not the kind of light that could
be assessed by human sense organs or scientific instruments. I. I. Rabi
was not thinking in foot-candles when he wrote, “It blasted; it pounced; it
bored its way into you. It was a vision which was seen with more than the
eye.” The light rose and fell across the bowl of desert in silence, no sound
heard until the expanding shell of shocked air finally arrived one hundred
seconds after the detonation.

Then came a crack like a rifle shot, startling a New York Times
correspondent at Feynman’s left. “What was that?” the correspondent
cried, to the amusement of the physicists who heard him.

“That’s the thing,” Feynman yelled back. He looked like a boy, lanky and
grinning, though he was now twenty-seven. A solid thunder echoed in the
hills. It was felt as much as heard. The sound made it suddenly more real
for Feynman; he registered the physics acoustically. Enrico Fermi, closer
to the blast, barely heard it as he tore up a sheet of paper and calculated
the explosive pressure by dropping the pieces, one by one, through the
sudden wind.

The jubilation, the shouting, the dancing, the triumph of that day have

been duly recorded. On the road back, another physicist thought Feynman
was going to float through the roof of the bus. The bomb makers rejoiced
and got drunk. They celebrated the thing, the device, the gadget. They
were smart, can-do fellows. After two years in this brown desert they had
converted some matter into energy. The theorists, especially, had now
tested an abstract blackboard science against the ultimate. First an idea—
now fire. It was alchemy at last, an alchemy that changed metals rarer than
gold into elements more baneful than lead.

Accustomed to spending their days in a mostly mental world, the
theorists had sweated over messy problems that they could touch and
smell. Almost everyone was working in a new field, the theory of
explosions, for example, or the theory of matter at extremely high
temperatures. The practicality both sobered and thrilled them. The purest
mathematicians had to soil their hands. Stanislaw Ulam lamented that until
now he had always worked exclusively with symbols. Now he had been
driven so low as to use actual numbers, and, even more humbling, they
were numbers with decimal points. There was no choosing issues for their
elegance or simplicity. These problems chose themselves—ticklish
chemicals and exploding pipes. Feynman himself interrupted diffusion
calculations to repair typewriters, interrupted typewriter repair to check the
safety of accumulating masses of uranium, and invented new kinds of
computing systems, part machine and part human, to solve equations that
theoretically could not be solved at all. A pragmatic spirit had taken over
the mesas of Los Alamos; no wonder the theorists were exhilarated.

Later they remembered having had doubts. Oppenheimer, urbane and
self-torturing aficionado of Eastern mysticism, said that as the fireball
stretched across three miles of sky (while Feynman was thinking,
“Clouds!”) he had thought of a passage from the Bhagavad-Gita, “Now I
am become Death, the destroyer of worlds.” The test director, Kenneth
Bainbridge, supposedly told him, “We are all sons of bitches now.” Rabi,
when the hot clouds dissipated, said he felt “a chill, which was not the
morning cold; it was a chill that came to one when one thought, as for
instance when I thought of my wooden house in Cambridge …” In the
actuality of the event, relief and excitement drowned out most such
thoughts. Feynman remembered only one man “moping”—his own
recruiter to the Manhattan Project, Robert Wilson. Wilson surprised

Feynman by saying, “It’s a terrible thing that we made.” For most the
second thoughts did not come until later. On the scene the scientists,
polyglot and unregulation though they seemed to the military staff, shared a
patriotic intensity that faded from later accounts. Three weeks after the
test, and three days after Hiroshima—on the day, as it happened, of
Nagasaki—Feynman used a typewriter to set down his thoughts in a letter
to his mother.

We jumped up and down, we screamed, we ran around slapping
each other on the backs, shaking hands, congratulating each other… .
Everything was perfect but the aim—the next one would be aimed for
Japan not New Mexico… . The fellows working for me all gathered in
the hall with open mouths, while I told them. They were all proud as hell
of what they had done. Maybe we can end the war soon.

The experiment code-named Trinity was the threshold event of an age. It
permanently altered the psychology of our species. Its prelude was a proud
mastery of science over nature—irreversible. Its sequel was violence and
death on a horrible scale. In the minute that the new light spread across
that sky, humans became fantastically powerful and fantastically vulnerable.
A story told many times becomes a myth, and Trinity became the myth that
illuminated the postwar world’s anxiety about the human future and its
reckless, short-term approach to life. The images of Trinity—the spindly
hundred-foot tower waiting to be vaporized, the jackrabbits found
shredded a half-mile from the blast, the desert sand fused to a bright jadegreen glaze—came to presage the central horror of an age. We have
hindsight. We know what followed: the blooding of the scientists, the loss of
innocence—Hiroshima, Dr. Strangelove, throw weights, radwaste, Mutual
Assured Destruction. The irony is built in. At first, though, ground zero
stood for nothing but what it was, a mirrored surface, mildly radioactive,
where earlier had stood a tower of steel. Richard Feynman, still not much
more than a boy, wrote, “It is a wonderful sight from the air to see the green
area with the crater at the center in the brown desert.”

The Man Comes In with His Briefcase

Thirty months had passed since the closing of the isotron project at
Princeton. Feynman and the rest of Wilson’s team had been left in a tense
limbo—not knowing. Wilson thought they were like professional soldiers
awaiting their next orders. “We became then what I suppose is the worst of
all possible things,” he said later, “a research team without a problem, a
group with lots of spirit and technique, but nothing to do.” To pass the time
he decided to invent some neutron-measuring equipment, sure to be
needed before long. He meanwhile felt a dearth of hard information from
Chicago, the project’s temporary center, domain of Enrico Fermi and his
atomic “pile” (the leather-jacketed physicist from Rome was using his
freshly acquired Anglo-Saxon vocabulary to coin a blunt nuclear jargon).
The pile—graphite bricks and uranium balls assembled into a lattice on a
university squash court—was chain-reacting. Wilson sent Feynman as his
emissary.

First came a briefing on the art of information gathering. He told
Feynman to approach each department in turn and offer to lend expertise.
“Have them describe to you in every detail the problem to such a point that
you really could sit down and work on it without asking any more
questions.”

“That’s not fair!” Feynman recalled saying.
“That’s all right, that’s what we’re going to do, and that way you’ll know

everything.”

Feynman took the train to Chicago early in 1943. It was his first trip west
since the Century of Progress fair a decade before. He did gather
information as efficiently as a spy. He got to know Teller and they talked
often. He went from office to office learning about neutron cross sections
and yields. He also left behind an impressed group of theorists. At one
meeting he handed them a solution to an awkward class of integrals that
had long stymied them. “We all came to meet this brash champion of
analysis,” recalled Philip Morrison. “He did not disappoint us; he explained
on the spot how to gain a quick result that had evaded one of our clever
calculators for a month.” Feynman saw that the problem could be broken
into two parts, such that part B could be looked up in a table of Bessel
functions and part A could be derived using a clever trick, differentiation
with respect to parameter on the integral side—something he had

practiced as a teenager. Now the audience was new and the stakes were
higher.

He was not the last prodigy to plant the kernel of a legend at the
Metallurgical Laboratory. Five months after he passed through, Julian
Schwinger arrived from Columbia, by way of Berkeley, where he had
already collaborated with Oppenheimer, and the MIT Radiation Laboratory.
Schwinger was Feynman’s exact contemporary, and the contrast between
these two New Yorkers was striking. Their paths had not yet crossed.
Schwinger impressed the Chicago scientists with his pristine black
Cadillac sedan and his meticulous attire. His tie never seemed to loosen
through that hot summer. A colleague trying to take notes while he worked
at the blackboard through the night found the process hectic. Schwinger,
who was ambidextrous, seemed to have fashioned a two-handed
blackboard technique that let him solve two equations at once.

Strange days for physicists reaching what should have been the intense
prime of their creative careers. The war disrupted young scientists’ lives
with infinite gentleness compared with the disruption suffered by most
draft-age men; still, Feynman could only wait uneasily for the course
change war would entail. Almost as a lark he had accepted a longdistance job offer from the University of Wisconsin, as a visiting assistant
professor on leave without pay. It gave him some feeling of security, though
he hardly expected to become more than a professor on leave. Now, in
Chicago, he decided at the last moment to take a side trip to Madison and
spent a day walking about the campus almost incognito. In the end he
introduced himself to a department secretary and met a few of his nominal
colleagues before heading back.

He returned to Princeton with a little briefcase full of data. He briefed
Wilson and the others: telling them how the bomb looked as of the winter of
early 1943, how much uranium would be needed, how much energy would
be produced. He was a twenty-four-year-old standing in shirtsleeves in a
college classroom. Wisecracks and laughter echoed from the corridor.
Feynman was not thinking about history, but Paul Olum was. “Someday
when they make a moving picture of the dramatic moment at which the
men of Princeton learn about the bomb, and the representative comes
back from Chicago and presents the information, it will be a very serious
situation, with everybody sitting in their suit coats and the man comes in

with his briefcase,” he told Feynman. “Real life is different than one
imagines.”

The army had made its unlikely choice of a civilian chief: a Jew, an
aesthete, a mannered, acerbic, left-flirting, ultimately self-destructive
scientist whose administrative experience had not extended beyond a
California physics group. J. Robert Oppenheimer—Oppy, Oppie, Opje—
held the respect of colleagues more for his quicksilver brilliance than for
the depth of his work. He had no feeling for experimentation, and his style
was unphysical; so, when he made mistakes, they were notoriously silly
ones: “Oppenheimer’s formula … is remarkably correct for him, apparently
only the numerical factor is wrong,” a theoretician once wrote acidly. In later
physicist lingo a calculation’s Oppenheimer factors were the missing π’s,
i’s, and minus signs. His physics was, as the historian Richard Rhodes
commented, “a physics of bank shots”—“It works the sides and the corners
… but prefers not to drive relentlessly for the goal.” No one understood the
core problems of quantum electrodynamics and elementary particle
physics better than he, but his personal work tended toward esoterica. As
a result, though he became the single most influential behind-the-scenes
voice in the awarding of Nobel Prizes in physics, he never received one
himself. In science as in all things he had the kind of taste called exquisite.
His suits were tailored with exaggerated shoulders and broad lapels. He
cared about his martinis and black coffee and pipe tobacco. Presiding
over a committee dinner at a steak house, he expected his companions to
follow his lead in specifying rare meat; when one man tried to order welldone, Oppenheimer turned and said considerately, “Why don’t you have
fish?” His New York background was what Feynman’s mother’s family had
striven toward and fallen back from; like Lucille Feynman he had grown up
in comfortable circumstances in Manhattan and attended the Ethical
Culture School. Then, where Feynman assimilated the new, pragmatic,
American spirit in physics, Oppenheimer had gone abroad to Cambridge
and Göttingen. He embraced the intellectual European style. He was not
content 
languages. To physicists
the modern 
Oppenheimer’s command of Sanskrit seemed a curiosity; to General
Groves it was another sign of genius. And genius was what the general
sought. Solid administrator that he was, he saw no value in a merely solid
chief scientist. Much to the surprise of some, Groves’s instincts proved

to master only 

correct. Oppenheimer’s genius was in leadership after all. He bound
Feynman to him in the winter of early 1943, as he bound so many junior
colleagues, taking an intimate interest in their problems. He called longdistance from Chicago—Feynman had never had a long-distance
telephone call from so far—to say that he had found a sanatorium for Arline
in Albuquerque.

In the choice of a site for the atomic bomb project, the army’s taste and
Oppenheimer’s coincided. Implausible though it may have seemed
afterward, military planning favored desert isolation for security against
enemy attack as well as more reasonably for the quarantine of a talkative
and unpredictable scientific community. Oppenheimer had long before
fallen in love with New Mexico’s unreal edges, the air clear as truth, the
stunted pines cleaving to canyon walls. He had made Western work shirts
and belt buckles part of his casual wear, and now he led Groves up the
winding trail to the high mesa where the Los Alamos Ranch School for
boys looked back across the wide desert to the Sangre de Cristo
Mountains. Not everyone shared their immediate sympathy with the
landscape. Leo Szilard, the Budapest native who first understood the
energy-liberating chain reaction—at other times so prescient about the
bomb project—declared: “Nobody could think straight in a place like that.
Everybody who goes there will go crazy.”

The impatient Princeton group signed up en masse. Wilson rushed out
to see the site and rushed back to report on the mud and confusion, a
theater being built instead of a laboratory, water lines being mislaid. The
state of secrecy was such that Feynman already knew that Groves and
Oppenheimer were arguing over the state of secrecy. Cyclotron parts and
neutron-counting gear started heading out by rail in wooden crates from
the Princeton station. Princeton’s carloads provided the new laboratory’s
core equipment, followed eventually by a painstakingly dismantled
cyclotron from Harvard and other generators and accelerators. Soon Los
Alamos was the best-equipped physics center in the world. The Princeton
team began leaving soon after the crates of gear. Richard and Arline went
with the first wave, on Sunday, March 28. Instructions were to buy tickets
for any destination but New Mexico. Feynman’s contrariety warred for a
moment with his common sense, and contrariety won out. He decided that,
if no one else was buying a New Mexico ticket, he would. The ticket seller

said, Aha—all these crates are for you?

The railroad provided a wheelchair and a private room for Arline. She
had begged Richard tearfully to pay the extra price for the room and hinted
that at last she might have a chance to be all that a wife should be to the
husband she loves. For both of them the move out West portended an
open-skied, open-ended future. It cut them off finally from their protective
institutions and their childhoods. Arline cried night after night from worry
and filled Richard with her dreams: curtains in their home, teas with his
students, chess before the fireplace, the Sunday comics in bed, camping
out in a tent, raising a son named Donald.

Chain Reactions

Fermi’s pile of uranium and graphite, sawed and assembled by
professional cabinetmakers in a University of Chicago racquets court,
became the world’s first critical mass of radioactive material on December
2, 1942. Amid the black graphite bricks, the world’s first artificial chain
reaction sustained itself for half an hour. It was a slow reaction, where a
bomb would have to be a fast reaction—less than a millionth of a second.
From the two-story-high ellipsoid of Chicago pile number one to the
baseball-size sphere of plutonium that exploded at Trinity, there could be
no smooth evolutionary path. To go from the big, slow pile to a small, fast
bomb would require a leap. There were few plausible intermediate stages.
Yet one possibility was playing itself out in Feynman’s mind the next
April, as he sat in a car just outside the makeshift security gate on the Los
Alamos mesa. Hydrogen atoms slowed neutrons, as Fermi had
discovered ages ago. Water was cheaply bound hydrogen. Uranium
dissolved in water could make a powerful compact reactor. Feynman
waited while the military guards tried to straighten out a mistake about his
pass. Left and right from the security gate stretched the beginnings of a
barbed-wire fence. Behind it lay no laboratory, but a few ranch buildings
and a handful of partially complete structures rose from the late-winter mud
in what the army called modified mobilization style, namely fast-setting
concrete foundations, wood frame, plain siding, asphalt roofs. The thirtyfive-mile ride from Santa Fe had ended in a harrowing dirt road cut bluntly

into the mesa walls. Feynman was not the only physicist who had never
been farther west than Chicago. The recruiters had warned scientists that
the army wanted isolation, but no one quite realized what isolation would
mean. At first the only telephone link was a single line laid down by the
Forest Service. To make a call one had to turn a crank on the side of the
box.

As he sat waiting for the military police to approve his pass, Feynman
was running through some calculations for the hypothetical in-between
reactor that would be called a water boiler. Instead of blocks of uranium
interspersed with graphite, this unit would use a uranium solution in water,
uranium enriched with a high concentration of the 235 isotope. The
hydrogen in the water would increase the effectiveness many times over.
He was trying to figure out how much uranium would be needed. He
worked on the water-boiler problem, picking it up and putting it down again
over the next weeks, thinking about the detailed geometry of neutrons
colliding in hydrogen. Then he tried something quirky. Perhaps the ideal
arrangement of uranium, the one that would require the least material,
would be different from the obvious uniform arrangement. He converted the
equations into a form that would allow a shortcut solution in terms of a
minimum principle, now his favorite technique. He worked out a theorem
for the spatial distribution of fissionable material—and discovered that the
difference would not matter in a reactor as small as this. When enriched
uranium finally began to arrive, the water boiler took form as a one-foot
sphere inside a three-foot cube of black beryllium oxide, sitting on a table
behind a heavy concrete wall at the pine-shaded bottom of Omega
Canyon, miles away from the main site. It served as the project’s first largescale experimental source of neutrons and the first real explosion hazard.
For all the theorists, the elements of this first problem became leitmotivs of
their time working on the bomb: the paths of neutrons, the mixing of
esoteric metals, the radiation, the heat, the probabilities.

In the muddy weeks of April the population of scientists reached about
thirty. They came and went through a temporary office in Santa Fe and
disappeared from there into a void in the landscape. If they had seen their
destination from the air, they would have understood that they were to be
situated in a compound atop a flat finger of ancient lava, one of many
radiating from the giant crater of a long-quiet volcano. Instead, their

imagining of the place began with mysterious addresses: P. O. Box 1663
for mail, Special List B for driver’s licenses. Not all the procedures devised
in the name of security helped allay the suspicions of the local population.
Any local policeman who pulled over Richard Feynman on the road north of
Santa Fe would see the driver’s license of a nameless Engineer identified
only as Number 185, residing at Special List B, whose signature was, for
some reason, Not required. The name Los Alamos meant hardly anything.
A canyon? A boys’ school? When scientists reached the site they would
see, as likely as not, a former professor standing outdoors and peppering
a military construction crew with unwanted instructions. If Oppenheimer
happened to be there to greet them, he would say from beneath the
already famous hat, “Welcome to Los Alamos and who the devil are you?”
The first familiar face that Feynman saw belonged to his Princeton friend
Olum—Olum was standing in the road with a clipboard, checking off each
truckload of lumber as it arrived. At first Feynman slept in one of a row of
beds lined up on the balcony of a school building. Food was still coming up
from Santa Fe in the form of box lunches.

the 

first 

them 

Amid the turmoil of construction, the concrete hardening in the open air,
the noise of hand-held buzz saws everywhere, only the theorists had the
equipment they needed to start work immediately—one blackboard on
true ground-breaking ceremony came on April 15.
rollers. Their 
Oppenheimer gathered 
few
together, along with 
experimentalists and chemists, to learn officially what they had been told in
hushed tones. They were to build a bomb, a weapon, a working device that
would concentrate the neutron-spraying phenomenon of radioactivity into a
speck of space and time concentrated enough to force an explosion. As
the lecture began, Feynman opened a notebook and wrote the cautionary
words, “Talks are not necessarily on things we should discuss but things
we have worked out.” Much was known to the teams from Berkeley and
Chicago, or so it seemed. The splitting of an ordinary uranium atom
required a blow from a fast, high-energy neutron. Every atom was its own
tiny bomb: it split with a jolt of energy and released more neutrons to
trigger its neighbors. The neutrons tended to slow, however, dropping
below the necessary threshold for further fission. The chain reaction would
not sustain itself. However, the rarer isotope, uranium 235, would fission
when struck by a slow neutron. If a mass of uranium were enriched with

these more volatile atoms, neutrons would find more targets and chain
reactions would live longer. Pure uranium 235—though it would not be
available in any but microscopic quantities for months—would make an
explosive reaction possible. Another way to encourage a chain reaction
was to surround the radioactive mass with a shell of metal, a tamper, that
would reflect neutrons back toward the center, intensifying their effects as
the glass of a greenhouse intensifies its infrared warming. A lanky
Oppenheimer aide, Robert Serber, described the different tamper
possibilities to his audience of thirty-odd men radiating an almost palpable
energy of nerves. Feynman wrote quickly. “… reflect neutrons … keep
bomb in … critical mass … Non absorbing equiscattering factor 3 in mass
… a good explosion …” He sketched some hasty diagrams. From nuclear
physics the discussion was forced to turn to the older but messier subject
of hydrodynamics. While the neutrons were doing their work, the bomb
would heat and expand. In a crucial millisecond would come shock waves,
pressure gradients, edge effects. These would be hard to calculate, and
for a long time the theorists would be calculating blind.

like making a 

Making a bomb was not 

theory of quantum
electrodynamics, where the ground had already been mined by the
greatest scientists. Here the problems were fresh, close to the surface,
and therefore—this surprised Feynman at first—easy. Beginning with the
issues raised by the first indoctrination lectures, he produced a string of
small triumphs, gratifying by contrast with the long periods of wandering in
the dark of pure theory. There were compensating difficulties, however.

“Most of what was to be done was to be done for the first time,” an
anonymous ghostwriter of the bomb’s official history wrote afterward. (The
ghostwriter was Feynman, called to this unaccustomed service by his
former department head, Harry Smyth.) Struggling to sum up the problems
of theoretical science at Los Alamos, he added “untried,” and then “with
materials which were for a long time practically unavailable.” Materials—
he could not bring himself to write uranium or plutonium after the
euphemistic years of tubealloy and 49. The wait for tubealloy had been
agonizing, for the theorists no less than the experimenters. More mundane
materials could be requisitioned—at the laboratory’s request Fort Knox
delivered two hemispheres of pure gold, each the size of half a basketball.
Feynman, giving Smyth a tour one day, pointed out that he was absently

kicking one of them, now in use as a doorstop. A request for osmium, a
dense nonradioactive metal, had to be denied when it became clear that
the metallurgists had asked for more than the world’s total supply. In the
cases of uranium 235 and plutonium, the laboratory had to wait for the
world’s supply to be multiplied a millionfold.

For now the only knowledge of these materials came from experiments
on quantities so tiny as to be invisible. The experiments were expensive
and painstaking. Even getting an early measurement of plutonium’s density
challenged the team at Chicago. The first dot of plutonium did not arrive at
Los Alamos until October 1943. Trials with more comfortable quantities
would have to wait; in the event, just one full-size experiment would be
possible. Most questions would have to be answered with pencil and
paper. It soon became clear that theory at Los Alamos would be
performed on a high wire without a net. The theoretical division was small,
just thirty-five physicists and a computing staff, charged with providing
analysis and prediction for all the much larger practical divisions:
experimental, ordnance, weapons, and chemical and metallurgical.
Analysis and prediction—what would happen if… ? Theorists at Los
Alamos had dispensed with the luxury of contemplating simple mysteries—
the way a single atom of hydrogen emits a single packet of light in such
and such a color, or the way an idealized wave might travel through an
idealized gas. The materials at hand were not idealized, and the theorists,
no less than the experimenters, had to poke about in the rubble-strewn
territory of nonlinear mathematics. Crucial decisions had to be made
before the experimenters could conduct trials. Feynman, in his anonymous
account, listed the main questions:

How big must the bombs be (the imploding sphere of plutonium or the
gun device in the case of uranium)? What would be the critical mass and
the critical radius for each material, the dimensions beyond which a chain
reaction would sustain itself?

What materials would best serve as tamper, a surrounding liner that
would reflect neutrons back into the bomb? The metallurgists had to begin
the work of fabricating tamper long before a true test was possible.

How pure would the uranium have to be? On this calculation rested a
decision to build or not build an enormous third stage in the isotopeseparation complex at Oak Ridge.

How much heat, how much light, how much shock would a nuclear

explosion create in the atmosphere?

The Battleship and the Mosquito Boat

They occupied a two-story green-painted box called T building (T for
theoretical), which Oppenheimer made his headquarters and 
the
laboratory’s spiritual center. He placed Hans Bethe, Cornell’s famous
nuclear physicist, in charge. The corridors were narrow, the walls thin. As
the scientists worked, they would hear from time to time Bethe’s booming
laughter. When they heard that laugh they suspected that Feynman was
nearby.

Bethe and Feynman—strange pair, some of their colleagues thought, a
pedantic-seeming German professor and a budding quicksilver genius.
Someone coined the nicknames “Battleship” and “Mosquito Boat.” Their
collaborative method was for Bethe to plow solidly ahead, a determined
giant, while Feynman buzzed back and forth across his bow, gesticulating,
yelling in his scabrous New York accent, “You’re crazy” and “That’s nuts.”
Bethe would respond calmly in his slow professorial way, working his way
through the problem analytically and explaining that he was not crazy,
Feynman was crazy. Feynman would consider and pace back and forth,
and finally through the partitions the other scientists would hear him shout
back, “No, no, you’re wrong.” He was reckless where Bethe was careful,
and he was just what Bethe was looking for, someone who would perform
the severest and most imaginative criticism, who would find flaws before
an idea went too far. Challenges and fresh insights came easily from
Feynman. He did not wait, as Bethe did, to double-check every intuitive
leap. His first idea did not always work. His cannier colleagues developed
a rule of thumb: If Feynman says it three times, it’s right.

Bethe was a natural choice as leader of the theoretical division. His
sweeping three-article review of the state of nuclear physics in the thirties
had established him as the authoritative theorist in that field. As
Oppenheimer well knew, Bethe had not just organized the existing
knowledge of the subject but had calculated or recalculated every line of
theory himself. He had worked on probability theory, on the theory of shock

waves, on the penetration of armor by artillery shells (this last paper, born
of his eagerness in 1940 to make some contribution to the looming war,
was immediately classified by the army so that Bethe himself, not yet an
American citizen, could not see it again). His explanation in 1938 of the
thermonuclear fires that light the sun would win him the Nobel Prize. Since
arriving at Cornell in 1935 he had made it one of the new world centers in
physics, as Oppenheimer and Ernest O. Lawrence had done for Berkeley.
Oppenheimer wanted him badly and strained to persuade him that the
atomic bomb was practical enough to draw him from the MIT Radiation
Laboratory, where he had begun to make a contribution in 1942. (When
Bethe agreed, the news was sent to Oppenheimer by a prearranged code:
a Western Union kiddiegram.) Bethe’s friend Edward Teller had pressed
hard for his participation. No one but Teller was now surprised when
Oppenheimer appointed Bethe, the sturdy pragmatist, to head the
theoretical division, to nurse the egos and the prodigies, to run the most
eccentric, temperamental, insecure, volatile assortment of thinkers and
calculators ever squeezed together in one place.

Bethe had learned his physics all across Europe: first at Munich, where
he studied with Arnold Sommerfeld, a prodigious producer of future Nobel
Prize winners, and then at Cambridge and Rome. At Cambridge, Dirac’s
lectures on the new quantum mechanics held center stage, but Bethe quit
attending after discovering that Dirac, having perfected his formulation of
the subject, was simply reading his book aloud. At Rome, where he was
the first foreign student of physics in the university’s history, the attraction
was Fermi. For a short time they worked together closely, and Bethe
acquired from him a style that he called “lightness of approach.” His first
great teacher, Sommerfeld, had always begun work on a problem by
writing down a formalism selected from a heavy arsenal of mathematical
equipment. He would work out the equations and only then translate the
results into an understanding of the physics. By contrast, Fermi would
begin by gently turning a problem over in his mind, by thinking about the
forces at work, and only later sketching out the necessary equations.
“Lightness” was a difficult attitude to sustain in a time of abstract,
unvisualizable quantum mechanics. Bethe combined the physicality of
Fermi’s attitude with an almost compulsive interest in computing the actual
numbers that an equation entailed. That was far from typical. Most

physicists could happily string equations down a page, working out the
algebra without keeping in mind a sense of real quantities, or ranges of
quantities, that a symbol might represent. For Bethe a theory only mattered
when he could get actual numbers out.

From Fermi’s Rome, Bethe returned to a Germany whose scientific
establishment was nearing the precipice. In his classroom at the ancient
university of Tübingen, where he took an assistant professorship, he saw
students wearing swastikas on arm bands. It was the autumn of 1932. That
winter Hitler took power. In February the Reichstag burned. By spring the
first of the Nazis’ anti-Jewish ordinances entailed the immediate dismissal
of one-fourth of the country’s university physicists—non-Aryan civil
servants. Bethe, his father a Prussian Protestant, did not consider himself
a Jew, but because his mother was Jewish his status in Nazi Germany was
clear. He was immediately shed from the faculty he had just entered.
Across Europe the greatest intellectual migration in history was already
beginning, and Bethe had little choice but to join it. Scientists in general
had the advantage of working in a polyglot community, where international
study and temporary overseas lectureships eased their emotional
transition—from citizen to refugee. He reached the New World in 1935.

Feynman had known Bethe’s name since he was an undergraduate—
the Bethe Bible, the three famous review articles on nuclear physics, had
provided the entire content of MIT’s course. He had seen Bethe once from
a distance at a scientific meeting. An ugly man, he had thought at first
glance, awkward, with slightly squashed features on a strong frame, light
brown hair bristling skyward above a broad brow. Feynman’s first
impression dissolved when they met up close in Santa Fe before heading
up to Los Alamos for the first time. Bethe, thirty-seven years old, had the
body of a mountain climber, and he spent as much time as possible hiking
in the canyons or up to the peaks behind the laboratory. He radiated
solidity and warmth. Soon after their arrival on the mesa, a statistical
fluctuation in the comings and goings of the theorists left Bethe stripped of
the people he needed to consult. Victor Weisskopf, his deputy, was away.
Teller was away—but Teller, anyway, had immediately grown more aloof
than useful; not only had Oppenheimer passed him over in favor of Bethe,
but Bethe had passed him over in favor of Weisskopf. So Bethe drifted
into Feynman’s office one day, and soon people down the corridor could

hear his booming laugh.

Bethe left the initial lectures trying to work out a way of calculating the
efficiency of a nuclear explosion. Serber had presented a formula for the
simplest case, when the mass of uranium or plutonium was just above
critical. For bombs, which would require masses substantially over critical,
the problem was far more difficult. He and Feynman developed a method
of classic elegance that became known as the Bethe-Feynman formula.
The dangerous practicalities of nuclear physics brought other questions. A
lump of uranium or plutonium, even smaller than critical mass, raised the
possibility of a runaway chain reaction—predetonation. Chemical
explosives were far more stable. Bethe assigned this problem to Feynman
in the project’s first months. Stray neutrons were always a presence, at
some low level of probability—from cosmic rays, from spontaneous
individual fissions, and from nuclear reactions caused by impurities.
Cosmic rays alone sparked enough fission to make uranium 235
noticeably hotter in the high altitudes of Los Alamos than in sea-level
laboratories. Without understanding predetonation, the scientists could not
understand detonation itself, because they would not know how the bomb
would behave during the split-second transition from subcritical to
supercritical. Feynman spent a long time thinking about the properties of a
chunk of matter in the peculiar condition of near-criticality, a form of matter
that science had not had occasion to ponder before. He recognized that
the essence of the problem was not its average behavior but its
fluctuations: bursts of neutron activity here and there, spreading in chains
before dying out.

Mathematics, in the form of probability theory, had barely begun to
provide tools for handling such complex patterns; he discussed the
problem with the Polish mathematician Stanislaw Ulam, and Ulam’s
approach to it helped midwife a new field of probability called branchingprocesses theory. Feynman himself worked out a theory of fluctuations
building upward from the easier-to-calculate probabilities of short chain
reactions: a neutron splits one atom; a newly liberated neutron finds
another target; but then the chain breaks. Some measurable fluctuations—
audible bursts of noise on a Geiger counter—could be traced back to an
origin in a single fission event. Others were combinations of chains. As
with so many other problems, Feynman took a geometrical approach,

considering the probability that a burst in a certain unit volume would lead
to a burst in another unit volume at a given time later. He arrived at a
practical method that reliably computed the chances of any premature
reaction taking hold. It was suitable even for the odd-shaped segments of
uranium that would be blasted into one another in the Hiroshima bomb.

Bethe found in Feynman the perfect foil and goad. This young man was
quick, fearless, and ambitious. He was not satisfied to take away one
problem and work on it; he wanted to work on everything at once. Bethe
decided to make him a group leader, a position otherwise reserved for
prominent physicists like Teller, Weisskopf, Serber, and the head of the
British contingent at Los Alamos, Rudolf Peierls. For his part Feynman,
who had lived through twenty-five years and a full formal education without
ever falling under the spell of a mentor, began to love Hans Bethe.

Diffusion

Feynman did some recruiting for the project. He had invited one of his MIT
fraternity friends to join the secret work. He even tried to recruit his father.
Melville’s health had turned poor—his chronic high blood pressure affected
him more and more—and Lucille wished he could afford to travel less.
Richard wrote his mother that there might be a job available as a
purchasing clerk. He wished, too, that Melville could see at close range the
heady intellectual world toward which he had so long aimed his son. “He
would be partly out of the rush, etc. of the business work, & would be
among academic men to a great extent, which I’m sure he would enjoy …
Purchasing these days is quite difficult, & everyone here is in a hell of a
hurry for their stuff … it will be a damn important position in our project and
scientific venture.”

Nothing came of that suggestion. In the spring of 1944 Feynman came
across a familiar name on a list of available physicists: T. A. Welton. He
filled out a requisition. His college friend, working as an instructor at the
University of Illinois, had been trying to remain a civilian by teaching
military-related courses and had watched unhappily as 
the more
distinguished members of his department disappeared to mysterious
locales. Feynman’s requisition rescued him. Welton, like so many

physicists by then, had pieced together more than the army security
officials liked to think possible. When he was invited to meet a stranger in
a hotel room in Chicago, and then invited by the stranger to drop
everything and move to New Mexico, he understood that this was, as he
said later, the classic impossible-to-refuse offer. The day he arrived,
Feynman took him on a long hike down into a gorge that had lately been
named Omega Canyon. He was able to startle Feynman with an
affirmative answer to his first question, “Do you know what we’re doing
here?”

“Yes,” Welton said. “You’re making an atomic bomb.” Feynman
recovered quickly. “Well,” he asked, “did you know we’re going to make it
with a new element?” His friend admitted that the news of plutonium had
not drifted as far as Illinois. While they walked—Welton’s lungs desperately
drawing in the underpressurized air of 7,000 feet above sea level—
Feynman intoxicated him with a briefing. They talked about the bomb.
There were now two designs. A uranium bomb would take the form of a
gun, creating a critical mass by firing a uranium bullet at a uranium target.
A plutonium bomb would use another audacious method. A hollow sphere
would be blown inward on itself by the shock from explosives packed all
around it. The hot plutonium atoms would be compressed not through one
dimension, as in the gun, but through three dimensions. The implosion
method, as it was accurately named, was starting to look better and better
—in part because so many problems had plagued the alternatives.
(Feynman did not mention his own initial reaction when implosion’s
inventor, Seth Neddermeyer, first reported experiments on explosives
wrapped around steel pipes. He had raised his hand in the back row and
announced, “It stinks.”)

As Welton listened, trying to keep up along the narrow canyon walls, he
understood that Feynman was also saying that he had worked hard to
establish himself as a smart kid to be reckoned with—that a young
researcher had to impress the senior people with his usefulness, that he,
Feynman, had been through that process, and that he had succeeded.
They talked only briefly about Arline. She was not well, spending most of
her days in a wooden bed in the Presbyterian Sanatorium, a small, poorly
staffed facility by the side of a highway in Albuquerque. Feynman, visiting
her almost every weekend, hitchhiked or borrowed a car to head down the

unpaved road toward Santa Fe on Friday afternoon or Saturday. Away
from the laboratory he would turn his thoughts back to the pure theory of
quantum mechanics. He used the long trip, and the hours when Arline
slept, to push his thesis work further. Welton remembered how obstinately
his friend had resisted the Lagrangian simplification of dynamical
problems when they were a pair of precocious sophomores in MIT’s theory
course. He was amused and impressed to hear how far Feynman had
taken the Lagrangian method in reformulating the most basic quantum
mechanics. Feynman sketched out his idea of expressing quantum
behavior as a sum of all the possible space-time trajectories a particle
could take, and he told Welton frankly that he did not know how to apply it.
He had a wonderful recipe that had not gelled.

Welton became the fourth physicist in the group Feynman headed, now
formally known as T-4, Diffusion Problems. As a group leader Feynman
was ebullient and original. He drove his team hard in pursuit of his latest
unorthodox idea for solving whatever problem was at hand. Sometimes
one of the scientists would object that a Feynman proposal was too
complex or too bizarre. Feynman would insist that they try it out, computing
in groups with their mechanical calculators, and he had enough
unexpected successes this way to win their loyalty to the cause of wideranging experimentation. They all tried to innovate in his fashion—no idea
too wild to be considered. He could be ruthless with work that did not meet
his high standards. Even Welton experienced the humiliation of a Feynman
rebuke—“definitely ungentle humor” to which “only a fool would have
subjected himself twice.” Still Feynman managed to build esprit. He had
taught himself to flip a pencil in one motion from a table into his hand, and
he taught the same trick to his group. One day, amid a typical swirl of
rumors that military uniforms were going to be issued to scientists working
in the technical area, Bethe walked in to talk about a calculation. Feynman
said he thought they should integrate it by hand, and Bethe agreed.
Feynman swiveled around and barked, “All right, pencils, calculate!”

A roomful of pencils flipped into the air in unison. “Present pencils!”

Feynman shouted. “Integrate!” And Bethe laughed.

Diffusion, that faintly obscure and faintly pedestrian holdover from
freshman physics, lay near the heart of the problems facing all the groups.
Open a perfume bottle in a still room. How long before the scent reaches a

set of nostrils six feet away, eight feet away, ten feet away? Does the
temperature of the air matter? The density? The mass of the scent-bearing
molecules? The shape of the room? The ordinary theory of molecular
diffusion gave a means of answering most of these questions in the form of
a standard differential equation (but not the last question—the geometry of
the containing walls caused mathematical complications). The progress of
a molecule dependedon a herky-jerky sequence of accidents, collisions
with other molecules. It was progress by wandering, each molecule’s path
the sum of many paths, of all possible directions and lengths. The same
problem arose in different form as the flow of heat througha metal. And the
central issues of Los Alamos, too, were problems of diffusion in a
newguise.

The calculation of critical mass quickly became nothing more or less
than a calculation of diffusion—the diffusion of neutrons through a strange,
radioactive minefield, where now a collision might mean more than a
glancing, billiard-ball change of direction. A neutron might be captured,
absorbed. And it might trigger a fission event that would give birth to new
neutrons. By definition, at critical mass the creation of neutrons would
exactly balance the loss of neutrons through absorption or through leakage
beyond the container boundaries. This was not a problem of arithmetic. It
was a problem of understanding the macroscopic spreading of neutrons
as built up from the microscopic individual wanderings.

For a spherical bomb the mathematics resembled another strange and
beautiful diffusion problem, the problem of the sun’s limb darkening. Why
does the sun have a crisp edge? Not because it has a solid or liquid
surface. On the contrary, the gaseous ball of the sun thins gradually; no
boundary marks a division between sun and empty space. Yet we see a
boundary. Energy diffuses outward from the roiling solar core toward the
surface, particles scattering one another in tangled paths, until finally, as
the hot gas thins, the likelihood of one more collision disappears. That
creates the apparent edge, its sharpness more an artifact of the light than
a physical reality. In the language of statistical mechanics, the mean free
path—the average distance a particle travels between one collision and
the next—becomes roughly as large as the radius of the sun. At that point
photons have freed themselves from the pinball game of diffusion and can
fly in a straight line until they scatter again, in the earth’s atmosphere or in

the sensitive retina of one’s eye. The difference in brightness between the
sun’s center and its edge gave an indirect means of calculating the nature
of the internal diffusion. Or should have—but the mechanics proved difficult
until a brilliant young mathematician at MIT, Norbert Wiener, devised a
useful method.

If the sun were a coolly radioactive metal ball a few inches across, with
neutrons rattling about inside, it would start to look like a miniaturized
version of the same problem. For a while this approach proved useful.
Past a certain point, however, it broke down. Too many idealizing
assumptions had to be made. In a real bomb, cobbled together from
mostly purified uranium, surrounded by a shell of neutron-reflecting metal,
the messy realities would defy the most advanced mathematics available.
Neutrons would strike other neutrons with a wide range of possible
energies. They might not scatter in every direction with equal probability.
The bomb might not be a perfect sphere. The difference between these
realities and the traditional oversimplifications arose in the first major
problem assigned to Feynman’s group. Bethe had told them to evaluate an
idea of Teller’s, the possibility of replacing pure uranium metal with
uranium hydride, a compound of uranium and hydrogen. The hydride
seemed to have advantages. For one, the neutron-slowing hydrogen would
be built into the bomb material; less uranium would be needed. On the
other hand, 
to burst
spontaneously into flame. When the Los Alamos metallurgists got down to
the work of making hydride chunks for testing, they set off as many as half
a dozen small uranium fires a week. The hydride problem had one virtue. It
pushed the theorists past the limits of their methods of calculating critical
masses. To make a sound judgment of Teller’s idea they would have to
invent new techniques. Before they considered the hydride, they had got by
with methods based on an approximation of Fermi’s. They been able to
assume, among other things, that neutrons would travel at a single
characteristic velocity. In pure metal, or in the slow reaction of the water
boiler, that assumption seemed to work out well enough. But in the odd
atomic landscape of the hydride, with its molecules of giant uranium atoms
bonded to two or three tiny hydrogen atoms, neutrons would fly about at
every conceivable velocity, from very fast to very slow. No one had yet
invented a way of computing critical mass when the velocities spread over

the substance was pyrophoric—it 

tended 

such a wide range. Feynman solved that problem with a pair of
approximations that worked like pincers. The method produced outer
bounds for the answer: one estimate known to be too large and another
known to be too small. The experience of actual computation showed that
this would suffice: the pair of approximations were so close together that
they gave an answer as accurate as was needed. As he drove the men in
his group toward a new understanding of criticality (poaching sneakily, it
seemed to them, on the territory of Serber’s group, T-2), he delivered up a
series of insights that struck even Welton, who understood him best, as
mystical. One day he declared that the whole problem would be solved if
they could produce a table of so-called eigenvalues, characteristic values
of energies, for the simplified model that T-2 had been using. That seemed
an impossible leap, and the group said so, but they soon found that he was
right again. For Teller’s scheme, the new model was fatal. The hydride was
a dead end. Pure uranium and plutonium proved far more efficient in
propagating a chain reaction.

the 

filled 

foreground of 

In this way, amid these clusters of scientists, the theory of diffusion
underwent a kind of scrutiny with few precedents in the annals of science.
Elegant textbook formulations were examined, improved, and then
discarded altogether. In their place came pragmatic methodologies,
gimmicks with patches. The textbook equations had exact solutions, at
least for special cases. In the reality of Los Alamos, the special cases
were useless. 
In Feynman’s Los Alamos work, especially, an
accommodation with uncertainty became a running theme. Few other
their papers with such blunt
scientists 
acknowledgments of what was not known: “unfortunately cannot be
expected to be as accurate”; “Unfortunately the figures contained herein
cannot be considered as ‘correct’”; “These methods are not exact.” Every
practical scientist learned early to include error ranges in their calculations;
they learned to internalize the knowledge that three miles times 1.852
kilometers per mile equals five and a half kilometers, not 5.556 kilometers.
Precision only dissipates, like energy in an engine governed by the second
law of thermodynamics. Feynman often found himself not just accepting the
process of approximation but manipulating it as a tool, employing it in the
creation of theorems. Always he stressed ease of use: “… an interesting
theorem was found to be extremely useful in obtaining approximate

expressions … it does permit, in many cases, a simpler derivation or
understanding …”; “… in all cases of interest thus far investigated …
accuracy has been found ample … extremely simple for computation and,
once mastered, quite simple to use in thinking about a wide variety of
neutron problems.” Theorems as theorems, or objects of mathematical
beauty, had never been so unappealing as at Los Alamos. Theorems as
tools had never been so valued. Again and again the theorists had to
devise equations with no hope of exact solution, equations that sentenced
them to countless hours of laborious computation with nothing at the end
but an approximation. When they were done, the body of diffusion theory
had become a hodgepodge. The state of knowledge was written in no one
place, but it was more practical than ever before.

For Feynman, thinking in his spare time about the pure theory of
particles and light, diffusion dovetailed peculiarly with quantum mechanics.
The traditional diffusion equation bore a family resemblance to the
standard Schrödinger equation; the crucial difference lay in a single
exponent, where the quantum mechanical version was an imaginary factor,
i. Lacking that i, diffusion was motion without inertia, motion without
momentum. Individual molecules of perfume carry inertia, but their
aggregate wafting through air, the sum of innumerable random collisions,
does not. With the i, quantum mechanics could incorporate inertia, a
particle’s memory of its past velocity. The imaginary factor in the exponent
mingled velocity and time in the necessary way. In a sense, quantum
mechanics was diffusion in imaginary time.

The difficulties of calculating practical diffusion problems forced the Los
Alamos theorists into an untraditional approach. Instead of solving neat
differential equations, they had to break the physics into steps and solve
the problem numerically, in small increments of time. The focus of attention
was pushed back down to the microscopic level of individual neutrons
following individual paths. Feynman’s quantum mechanics was evolving
along strikingly similar lines. His private work, like the diffusion work,
embodied an abandonment of a too simple, too special differential
approach; the emphasis on step-by-step computation; and above all the
summing of paths and probabilities.

Computing by Brain

Walking around the hastily built wooden barracks that housed the soul of
the atomic bomb project in 1943 and 1944, a scientist would see dozens
of men laboring over computation. Everyone calculated. The theoretical
department was home to some of the world’s masters of mental arithmetic,
a martial art shortly to go the way of jiujitsu. Any morning might find men
such as Bethe, Fermi, and John von Neumann together in a single small
room where they would spit out numbers in a rapid-fire calculation of
pressure waves. Bethe’s deputy, Weisskopf, specialized in a particularly
oracular sort of guesswork; his office became known as the Cave of the
Hot Winds, producing, on demand, unjustifiably accurate cross sections
(shorthand for the characteristic probabilities of particle collisions in
various substances and circumstances). The scientists computed
everything from the shapes of explosions to the potency of Oppenheimer’s
cocktails, first with rough guesses and then, when necessary, with a
precision that might take weeks. They estimated by seat of the pants, as a
cook who wants one-third cup of wine might fill half a juice glass and
correct with an extra splash. Anyone who calculated logarithms by mentally
interpolating between the entries in a standard table—a technique that
began to vanish thirty years later, when inexpensive electronic calculators
made it obsolete—learned to estimate this way, using some unconscious
feeling for the right curve. Feynman had a toolbox of such curves in his
head, precalibrated. His Los Alamos colleagues were sometimes amused
to hear him, when thinking out loud, howl a sort of whooping glissando
when he meant, this rises exponentially; a different sound signified
arithmetically. When he started managing groups of people who handled
laborious computation, he developed a reputation for glancing over
people’s shoulders and stabbing his finger at each error: “That’s wrong.”
His staff would ask why he was putting them to such labor if he already
knew the answers. He told them he could spot wrong results even when he
had no idea what was right—something about the smoothness of the
numbers or the relationships between them. Yet unconscious estimating
was not really his style. He liked to know what he was doing. He would
rummage through his toolbox for an analytical gimmick, the right key or
lock pick to slip open a complicated integral. Or he would try various

simplifying assumptions: Suppose we treat some quantity as infinitesimal.
He would allow an error and then measure the bounds of the error
precisely.

It seemed to colleagues that some of his computation was a matter of
conscious reputation building. One day Feynman, who had made a point of
considering watches to be affectations, received a pocket watch from his
father. He wore it proudly, and his friends began to needle him; they asked
the time at every opportunity, until he began responding, with a glance at
the watch: “Well, four hours and twenty minutes ago it was twelve before
noon,” or “In three hours and forty-nine minutes it will be two seventeen.”
Few caught on. He was doing no arithmetic at all. Rather, he had designed
a simple parlor trick in the spirit of gauge theories to come. Each morning
he would turn his watch to a fixed offset from the true time—three hours
and forty-nine minutes fast one day; the next day four hours and twenty
minutes slow. He had only to remember one number and read the other
directly from the watch. (This was the same Feynman who, years later,
trying to describe to a layman the intricate shiftings of time and orientation
on which theoretical physics depended, said, “You know how it is with
daylight saving time? Well, physics has a dozen kinds of daylight saving.”)
When Bethe and Feynman went up against each other in games of
calculating, they competed with special pleasure. Onlookers were often
surprised, and not because the upstart Feynman bested his famous elder.
On the contrary, more often the slow-speaking Bethe 
to
outcompute Feynman. Early in the project they were working together on a
formula that required the square of 48. Feynman reached across his desk
for the Marchant mechanical calculator.

tended 

Bethe said, “It’s twenty-three hundred.”
Feynman started to punch the keys anyway. “You want to know exactly?”
Bethe said. “It’s twenty-three hundred and four. Don’t you know how to take
squares of numbers near fifty?” He explained the trick. Fifty squared is
2,500 (no thinking needed). For numbers a few more or less than 50, the
approximate square is that many hundreds more or less than 2,500.
Because 48 is 2 less than 50, 48 squared is 200 less than 2,500—thus
2,300. To make a final tiny correction to the precise answer, just take that
difference again—2—and square it. Thus 2,304.

Feynman had internalized an apparatus for handling far more difficult

calculations. But Bethe impressed him with a mastery of mental arithmetic
that showed he had built up a huge repertoire of these easy tricks, enough
to cover the whole landscape of small numbers. An intricate web of
knowledge underlay the techniques. Bethe knew instinctively, as did
Feynman, that the difference between two successive squares is always
an odd number, the sum of the numbers being squared. That fact, and the
fact that 50 is half of 100, gave rise to the squares-near-fifty trick. A few
minutes later they needed the cube root of 2½. The mechanical calculators
could not handle cube roots directly, but there was a look-up chart to help.
Feynman barely had time to open the drawer and reach for the chart
before he heard Bethe say, “That’s 1.35.” Like an alcoholic who plants
bottles within arm’s reach of every chair in the house, Bethe had stored
away a device for anywhere he landed in the realm of numbers. He knew
tables of logarithms and he could interpolate with unerring accuracy.
Feynman’s own mastery of calculating had taken a different path. He knew
how to compute series and derive trigonometric functions, and how to
visualize the relationships between them. He had mastered mental tricks
covering the deeper landscape of algebraic analysis—differentiating and
integrating equations of the kind that lurk dragonlike in the last chapters of
calculus texts. He was continually put to the test. The theoretical division
sometimes seemed like the information desk at a slightly exotic library.
The phone would ring and a voice would ask, “What is the sum of the
series 1 + (½)4 + (⅓)4 + (¼)4 + … ?”

“How accurate do you want it?” Feynman replied.
“One percent will be fine.”
“Okay,” Feynman said. “One point oh eight.” He had simply added the

first four terms in his head—that was enough for two decimal places.

Now the voice asked for an exact answer. “You don’t need the exact

answer,” Feynman said.

“Yeah, but I know it can be done.”
So Feynman told him. “All right. It’s pi to the fourth over ninety.”
He and Bethe both saw their talents as labor-saving devices. It was also
a form of jousting. At lunch one day, feeling even more ebullient than usual,
he challenged the table to a competition. He bet that he could solve any
problem within sixty seconds, to within ten percent accuracy, that could be
stated in ten seconds. Ten percent was a broad margin, and choosing a

suitable problem was hard. Under pressure, his friends found themselves
unable to stump him. The most challenging problem anyone could produce
was: Find the tenth binomial coefficient in the expansion of (1 + x)20.
Feynman solved that just before the clock ran out. Then Paul Olum spoke
up. He had jousted with Feynman before, and this time he was ready. He
demanded the tangent of ten to the hundredth. The competition was over.
Feynman would essentially have had to divide one by ? and throw out the
first one hundred digits of the result—which would mean knowing the onehundredth decimal digit of ?. Even Feynman could not produce that on
short notice.

He integrated. He solved equations taking the spirit of infinite
summation into more difficult realms. Some of these perilous, nontextbook,
nonlinear equations could be integrated through just the right combination
of mental gimmicks. Others could not be integrated exactly. One could plug
in numbers, make estimates, calculate a little, make new estimates,
extrapolate a little. One might visualize a polynomial expression to
approximate the desired curve. Then one might try to see whether the
leftover error could be managed. One day, making his rounds, Feynman
found a man struggling with an especially complicated varietal, a nonlinear
three-and-a-half-order equation. There was a business of integrating three
times and figuring out a one-half derivative—and in the end Feynman
invented a shortcut, a numerical method for taking three integrals at once
and a half integral besides, all more accurately than had been thought
possible. Similarly, working with Bethe, he invented a new and general
method of solving third-order differential equations. Second order had
been manageable for several centuries. Feynman’s invention was precise
and practical. It was also doomed to a quick obsolescence in an age of
machine computation, as was, for that matter, the skill of mental arithmetic
that did so much to establish Feynman’s legend.

Computing by Machine

Not only the atomic era but also the computer era had its start in those
years. Scattered about the nation’s military and civilian laboratories, a few
researchers focused exclusively on the means of calculating instead of the

calculations themselves. At Los Alamos, in particular, the demand for
numerical computation grew more intense than anywhere else on earth.
The means were mechanical and now partly electronic, though the crucial
technological key, the transistor, remained to be invented at the decade’s
end. Calculating technology became a hybrid with machine parts and
human parts: people carrying cards from place to place served as the
memories and logical-branching units of near computers that stretched
across rows and columns of desks.

The bomb project could draw on the best technology available
anywhere, but the best technology offered little to the working scientist. The
manufacturers of such equipment—the International Business Machines
Corporation already preeminent among them—considered the scientific
market to be negligible. It could not imagine the vast clientele that would
soon consume as much calculating capacity as could be created: for
forecasting weather, designing engines, analyzing proteins, scheduling
airplanes, and simulating everything from ecosystems to heart valves.
Business was thought to be the sole potential consumer for business
machines, and business meant accounting, which meant addition and
subtraction. Multiplication seemed a luxury, although it might be necessary
to multiply monthly sales by twelve. Division by machine was esoteric.
Computation of mortgage payments and bond yields could be managed
by humans with standard tables.

The workhorse of scientific calculating was the Marchant calculator, a
clattering machine nearly as large as a typewriter, capable of adding,
subtracting, multiplying, and with some difficulty dividing numbers of up to
ten digits. (At first, to save money, the project ordered slower, eight-digit
versions as well. They were rarely used.) In these machines a carriage
spun around, propelled at first by a hand crank and later by an electric
motor. Keys and levers pushed the carriage left or right. Counter and
register dials displayed painted digits. There were rows and columns of
keys for entering numbers, a plus bar and a minus bar, a multiplier key and
a negative multiplier key, shift keys, and a key for stopping the machine
when division went out of control, as it often did. Mechanical arithmetic was
no simple affair. With all its buttons and linkages the Marchant was not
quite as powerful as the giant Difference Engine and Analytical Engine,
invented in England a century before by Charles Babbage in hopes of

the printed 

generating 
tables of numbers on which navigators,
astronomers, and mathematicians had to rely. Not only did Babbage solve
the problem of carrying digits from one decimal place to the next; his
machines actually used punched cards, borrowed from mechanical looms,
to convey data and instructions. In the era of steam power, few of his
contemporaries appreciated the point.

The Marchants took a hard pounding at Los Alamos. Metal parts wore
thin and came out of alignment. The officially nonexistent laboratory was
poorly suited to field-service visits by the manufacturer’s repair crews, so
standard procedure required the shipping of broken machines back to
California. Eventually three or four machines were in the pipeline at any
one time. Feynman, frustrated, turned to Nicholas Metropolis, a mustached
Greek mathematician who later became an authority on computation and
numerical methods, and said, “Let’s learn about these damned things and
not have to send them to Burbank.” (Feynman grew a temporary mustache,
too.) They spent hours taking apart new and old machines for comparative
diagnosis; learned where the jams and slippages began; and hung out a
shingle advertising, “Computers Repaired.” Bethe was not amused at this
waste of his theoreticians’ time. He finally ordered a halt to the tinkering.
Feynman complied, knowing that within weeks the shortage of machines
would change Bethe’s mind.

Escalation of the computation effort came in the fall of 1943 with an
order to IBM for business machines to be delivered to an unknown
location: three 601 multipliers, one 402 tabulator, one reproducer-summary
punch, one verifier, one keypunch, one sorter, and one collator.
Astronomers at Columbia had been experimenting with punch-card
computing before the war. A multiplier, an appliance the size of a
restaurant stove, could process calculations in large batches. Electrical
probes found the holes in the cards, and operations could be configured by
plugging groups of wires into a patchboard. Among the computationminded at Los Alamos, the prospect of such machines caused excitement.
Even before they arrived, one of the theorists, Stanley Frankel, set about
devising improvements: for example, tripling the output by rearranging the
plugs so that three sets of three- or four-digit numbers could be multiplied
in a single pass. Having requisitioned the machines, the scientists now
also requisitioned a maintenance man—an IBM employee who had been

into 

drafted 
the army. They were gaining adroitness at military
procurement. The crates arrived two days before the repairman; in those
two days Feynman and his colleagues managed to get the machines
unpacked and assembled, after a fashion, with the help of nothing but a set
of wiring blueprints. So much more powerful were they that Feynman—
sensitive to rhythms as always—rapidly discovered that he could program
them to clatter out the cadence of well-known songs. The theorists began
to organize something new in the annals of computation: a combination of
the calculating machine and the factory assembly line. Even before the IBM
machines arrived Feynman and Metropolis set up an array of people—
mostly wives of scientists, working at 
three-eighths salary—who
individually handled pieces of complex equations, one cubing a number
and passing it on, another performing a subtraction, and so on. It was
mass production married to numerical calculation. The banks of women
wielding Marchants simulated the internal workings of a computer. As a
later generation would discover, there was something mentally seductive in
the act of breaking calculus into the algorithmic cogs needed for machine
computation. It forced the mind back down into the essence of arithmetic. It
also began a long transformation in the understanding of what kinds of
equations were solvable. Stacks of punch cards could solve equations for
a ball of fire rising through a suddenly turbulent atmosphere, by stepping
through successive approximations for time 0:01, time 0:02, time 0:03 …
though by the lights of traditional analysis those sharply nonlinear
equations were unsolvable.

Of the many problems put to the Los Alamos computers, none better
anticipated the coming age of massive scientific simulation than implosion
itself: how to calculate the motion of an inward-flowing shock wave. An
explosive charge wrapped around the bomb was to set the shock wave in
motion, and the pressure would crush a nugget of plutonium into criticality.
How should the bomb assembly be configured to assure a stable
detonation? What kind of fireball would ensue? Such questions required a
workable formula for the propagation of a spherical detonation wave in a
compressible fluid, the “compressible fluid” in this case being the shotputsize piece of plutonium liquefied in the microseconds before it became a
nuclear blast. The pressure would be more intense than at the earth’s
center. The temperature would reach 50 million degrees Centigrade. The

theorists were on their own here; experimentalists could offer little more
than good wishes. All during 1944 the computation effort grew. John von
Neumann served as a traveling consultant with an eye on the postwar
future. Von Neumann—mathematician, logician, game theorist (he was
more and more a fixture in the extraordinary Los Alamos poker game), and
one of the fathers of modern computing—talked with Feynman while they
worked on the IBM machines or walked though the canyons. He left
Feynman with two enduring memories. One was the notion that a scientist
need not be responsible for the entire world, that social irresponsibility
might be a reasonable stance. The other was a faint, early recognition of
the mathematical phenomena that would later be called chaos: a
persistent, repeatable irregularity in certain equations as they prepared to
run them through their primitive computers. As a shock wave, for example,
passed though a material, it left oscillations in its wake. Feynman thought
at first that the irregular wiggles must be numerical errors. Von Neumann
told him that the wiggles were actually features of interest.

Von Neumann also kept these new computer specialists up to date with
the other sites he visited. He brought news of an electromechanical Mark I
under construction at Harvard, a relay calculator at Bell Laboratories,
human neuronal research at the University of Illinois, and at the Aberdeen
Proving Ground in Maryland, where problems of ballistic trajectories
motivated the calculators, a more radical device with a new kind of
acronym: ENIAC, for Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer, a
machine composed of eighteen thousand vacuum tubes. The tubes
controlled binary on-off flip-flops; in a bow to the past, the flip-flops were
arranged in rings of ten, to simulate the mechanical wheels used in
decimal calculating machines. The ENIAC had too many tubes to survive.
Von Neumann estimated: “Each time it is turned on, it blows two tubes.”
The army stationed soldiers carrying spare tubes in grocery baskets. The
operators borrowed mean free path terminology from the ricocheting
particles of diffusion theory; the computer’s mean free path was its
average time between failures.

Meanwhile, under the influence of this primal dissection of mathematics,
Feynman retreated from pragmatic engineering long enough to put
together a public lecture on “Some Interesting Properties of Numbers.” It
was a stunning exercise in arithmetic, logic, and—though he would never

have used the word—philosophy. He invited his distinguished audience
(“all the mighty minds,” he wrote his mother a few days later) to discard all
knowledge of mathematics and begin from first principles—specifically,
from a child’s knowledge of counting in units. He defined addition, a + b,
as the operation of counting b units from a starting point, a. He defined
multiplication (counting b times). He defined exponentiation (multiplying b
times). He derived the simple laws of the kind a + b = b + a and (a + b) + c
= a + (b + c), laws that were usually assumed unconsciously, though
quantum mechanics itself had shown how crucially some mathematical
operations did depend on their ordering. Still taking nothing for granted,
Feynman showed how pure logic made it necessary to conceive of inverse
operations: subtraction, division, and the taking of logarithms. He could
always ask a new question that perforce required a new arithmetical
invention. Thus he broadened the class of objects represented by his
letters a, b, and c and the class of rules by which he was manipulating
them. By his original definition, negative numbers meant nothing.
Fractions, fractional exponents, imaginary roots of negative numbers—
these had no immediate connection to counting, but Feynman continued
pulling them from his silvery logical engine. He turned to irrational numbers
and complex numbers and complex powers of complex numbers—these
came inexorably as soon as one from facing up to the question: What
number, i, when multiplied by itself, equals negative one? He reminded his
audience how to compute a logarithm from scratch and showed how the
numbers converged as he took successive square roots often and thus, as
an inevitable by-product, derived the “natural base” e, that ubiquitous
fundamental constant. He was recapitulating centuries of mathematical
history—yet not quite recapitulating, because only a modern shift of
perspective made it possible to see the fabric whole. Having conceived of
complex powers, he began to compute complex powers. He made a table
of his results and showed how they oscillated, swinging from one to zero to
negative one and back again in a wave that he drew for his audience,
though they knew perfectly well what a sine wave looked like. He had
arrived at trigonometric functions. Now he posed one more question, as
fundamental as all the others, yet encompassing them all in the round
recursive net he had been spinning for a mere hour: To what power must e

be raised to reach i? (They already knew the answer, that e and i and ?
were conjoined as if by an invisible membrane, but as he told his mother, “I
went pretty fast & didn’t give them a hell of a lot of time to work out the
reason for one fact before I was showing them another still more
amazing.”) He now repeated the assertion he had written elatedly in his
notebook at the age of fourteen, that the oddly polyglot statement eπi + 1 =
0 was the most remarkable formula in mathematics. Algebra and
geometry, their distinct languages notwithstanding, were one and the
same, a bit of child’s arithmetic abstracted and generalized by a few
minutes of the purest logic. “Well,” he wrote, “all the mighty minds were
mightily impressed by my little feats of arithmetic.”

Indeed, if Feynman was, as his friend Welton thought, consciously trying
to establish himself among these influential physicists, he was succeeding
even more than he knew. As early as November 1943, seven months after
the Los Alamos project began, Oppenheimer began trying to persuade his
department at Berkeley to hire Feynman for after the war. He wrote to the
department chairman, Birge:

He is by all odds the most brilliant young physicist here, and
everyone knows this. He is a man of thoroughly engaging character
and personality, extremely clear, extremely normal in all respects, and
an excellent teacher with a warm feeling for physics in all its aspects.

Oppenheimer warned that Feynman was sure to have other job offers,
because “a not inconsiderable number of ‘big shots’” had already noticed
him. He quoted two of the big shots. Bethe, according to Oppenheimer,
had said bluntly that he would sooner lose any two scientists than lose
Feynman. And Wigner of Princeton had made what was, for a physicist’s
physicist in the 1940s, perhaps the ultimate tribute.

“He is a second Dirac,” Wigner said, “only this time human.”

Fenced In

Feynman celebrated his wedding anniversary by grilling steak outdoors at
the Presbyterian Sanatorium in a small charcoal broiler that Arline had

ordered from a catalog. She also got him a chef’s hat, apron, and gloves.
He wore them self-consciously, along with his new mustache, while she
reveled in the domesticity of it all, until he could no longer stand the idea of
people watching him from passing cars. She laughed, asking, as she so
often did, why he cared what other people thought. Steak was an
extravagance—eighty-four cents 
they ate
for 
watermelon, plums, and potato chips. The hospital lawn sloped down to
Route 66, the cross-country highway, where the traffic roared by.
Albuquerque was sweltering, and they were happy. Arline talked to her
parents by 
for seven minutes, another
extravagance. After Richard left to hitchhike back north, a late-afternoon
thundershower blackened the desert. Arline worried about him in the
downpour. She still had not gotten used to the raw force of storms in the
open West.

two pounds. With 

long-distance 

telephone 

it 

His near-weekly trips through the valley that lay between the Jemez and
Sangre de Cristo mountains made him a rarity on the mesa. Few residents
of that hermetic community had occasion to leave at all. Once, in a fanciful
conversation about likely candidates to be a Nazi spy, one friend, Klaus
Fuchs, a German turned Briton, suggested that it could only be Dick
Feynman—who else had insinuated himself into so many different parts of
the 
in
laboratory’s work? Who else had a regular rendezvous 
Albuquerque? In its unreal isolation, with its unusual populace, Los Alamos
was growing into a parody of a municipality. It took its place in the mental
geography of its residents as it was officially: not a village in the lee of the
Jemez Mountains, not only a fenced-in circle of houses on dirt paths by a
pond, with ducks, but also a fictitious abstraction, P. O. Box 1663, Santa
Fe, New Mexico. To some it carried an ersatz resonance of a certain
European stereotype of America, as one resident noted—“a pioneer
people starting a new town, a self-contained town with no outside contacts,
isolated in vast stretches of desert, and surrounded by Indians.” Victor
Weisskopf was elected mayor. Feynman was elected to a town council.
The fence that marked the city line heightened a magic-mountain
atmosphere—it kept the world apart. An elite society had assembled on
this hill. Elite and yet polyglot—in this cauldron, as in the other wartime
laboratories, a final valedictory was being written to the Protestant,
gentlemanly, leisurely class structure of American science. Los Alamos did

gather an aristocracy—“the most exclusive club in the world,” one Oxonian
said—yet the princely, exquisitely sensitive Oppenheimer made it into a
democracy, where no invisible lines of rank or status were to impede the
scientific discourse. The elected councils and committees furthered that
impression. Graduate students were supposed to forget that they were
talking to famous professors. Academic titles were mainly left behind with
the business suits and neckties. It was a democracy by night, too, when
inflamed parties brought together cuisines and cocktails of four continents,
dramatic readings and political debates, waltzes and square dances (the
same Oxonian, bemused amid the clash of cultures, asked, “What exactly
is square about it—the people, the room, or the music?”), a Swede singing
torch songs, an Englishman playing jazz piano, and Eastern Europeans
playing Viennese string trios. Feynman played brassy drum duets with
Nicholas Metropolis and organized conga lines. He had never been
exposed to culture as such a flamboyant stew (certainly not when he was a
student learning to disdain the packaged morsels that MIT handed to its
would-be engineers). One party featured an original ballet, to modernisticsounding music by Gershwin, titled Sacre du Mesa. At the end a clattering,
flashing mechanical brain noisily revealed the sacred mystery of the mesa:
2 + 2 = 5.

Los Alamos built its wall against theoutside world and thrived within.
Separately and privately Richard and Arline, too, sought what refuge they
could. They made their secret lives. They built a fence of their own. None of
his scientific friends knew that he called her Putzie and she called him
Coach; that she noticed the muscles hardening in his legs from all his
hiking; that the days of respite from her illness were growing rarer. She
wrote him in code, playing to his love of unraveling puzzles; his father did
this, too. Their letters caught the eye of the military censors at the
laboratory’s Intelligence Office. The censors alerted Feynman to regulation
4(e): Codes, ciphers or any form of secret writing will not be used.
Crosses, X’s or other markings of a similar nature are equally
objectionable. Censorship had been designed delicately to accommodate
a nonmilitary clientele, university people who still liked to imagine that they
were volunteers in a project of scientific research in a nation where the
privacy of the mail was sacred. The censors trod carefully. They tried to
turn mail around the day they received it, and they agreed to allow

correspondence in French, German, Italian, and Spanish. They felt entitled
at least to ask Feynman for the key to the codes.

He said he did not have a key or want a key. Finally they agreed that if
Arline would enclose a key for their benefit they would remove it before the
envelope got to Feynman.

Inevitably, he then ran afoul of regulation 8(l), a delightfully (to Feynman)
self-referential law requiring the censorship of any information concerning
these censorship regulations or any discourse on the subject of
censorship. He got the message to Arline nonetheless, and her acid
sense of fun took over. She started sending letters with holes cut in them or
blotches of ink covering words: “It’s very difficult writing because I feel that
the —— is looking over my shoulder.” He would respond with numerical
fancies, pointing out how peculiarly the decimal expansion of 1/243
repeats itself: .004 115 226 337 448 … and his increasingly frustrated
official audience would have to ensure that the string of digits was neither a
cipher nor a technical secret. Feynman explained with subtle glee that this
fact had the empty, tautological, zero-information-content quality of all
mathematical truths. In one of her mail-order catalogs Arline found a kit for
do-it-yourself jigsaw puzzles; the next letter from the Albuquerque
sanatorium to Box 1663 came disassembled in a little sack. From another
the censors deleted a suspicious-sounding shopping list. Richard and
Arline talked about a booby-trapped letter that would begin, “I hope you
remembered to open this letter carefully because I have included the Pepto
Bismol powder …” Their letters were a lifeline. No wonder, under watchful
eyes, the lovers found ways to make them private.

The censorship, like the high barbed-wire fence, reminded the mesa’s
more sensitive residents of their special status: watched, enclosed,
restricted, isolated, surrounded, guarded. They understood that no other
civilian post office box had all its mail opened and read. The fence was a
double-edged symbol. Few scientists were so important as to merit armed
soldiers patrolling their laboratory perimeters. They could not help feeling
some pride. Feynman admonished his parents to maintain secrecy: “There
are Captains in the Army who live up here who don’t know what we’re
doing. (Even Majors.)” Much later, in a post–Catch-22 world, the military
trappings were remembered as irritants and targets of mockery. At the
time it was not so simple. The men and women of Los Alamos resented

the fence and respected the fence. Feynman explored most of its length.
When he discovered holes, with well-beaten paths leading through, he
pointed them out in a spirit of good citizenship, annoyed only that the
guards responded so lackadaisically. (“I explained it to him & the officer in
charge,” he wrote Arline, “but I bet they don’t do anything.”) He never
realized that the holes had semiofficial sanction. The security staff
tolerated them—with Oppenheimer’s connivance, it seemed—so that
people from the local tribes could come to the laboratory’s twelve-cent
movies.

Feynman’s exploring drew him to every secret and private place. He had
a fidgety way of prying into things—the laboratory’s new Coca-Cola
dispenser, for example, a contraption that secured the bottles with a
locked steel collar around their necks. This device replaced an older
container, the most ancient prototype of the soda machine: customers
would open the lid, take a bottle, and honorably drop their coin in a box.
The new dispenser struck Feynman as a withdrawal of trust; thus he felt
entitled to accept the technological challenge and finesse the mechanism.
Was that right or wrong? He debated the moral principles with his friends.
Meanwhile he found himself abstaining from liquor. He had got so drunk
one night that he could tell it was ruining his drum playing and joke telling,
although it did not stop him from running all over the base singing and
beating pots and pans; finally he passed out, and Klaus Fuchs took him
home. He decided to give up alcohol, along with tobacco, and wondered
whether it was a sign of encroaching conventionality. Was he getting
“moraller and moraller” as he got older? (“That’s bad.”)

His reputation as a skilled prier spread. One scientist left some
belongings in a storeroom at Fuller Lodge and borrowed Feynman’s
fingers to pick the Yale lock. Paper clips, screwdriver, two minutes. Two
men arrived, breathless from running up the stairs, and begged Feynman
to crack a file cabinet holding a crucial document about a ski tow.
Combination locks still seemed too hard. As a group leader he had been
issued a special steel safe for sensitive material of his own, and he had
not yet managed a way to break in. He would spin the dial from time to
time. Occasionally it occurred to him that his interest in locks was turning
into an obsession. Why? “Probably,” he told Arline,

because I like puzzles so much. Each lock is just like a puzzle you
have to open without forcing it. But combination locks have me
buffaloed.

You do too, sometimes, but eventually I figure out you.

Locks mixed human logic and mechanical logic. The designer’s strategy
was constrained by the manufacturer’s convenience or the limits of the
metal, as it was in so many of the bomb project’s puzzles. The official logic
of a Los Alamos safe, as displayed in the dial’s numbers and hatch marks,
indicated a million different combinations—three numbers from 0 to 99.
Some experimentation, though, showed Feynman that the markings
disguised a considerable margin of error, plus or minus two, attributable to
plain mechanical slackness; if the correct number was 23, anything from
21 to 25 would work as well. When he was searching combinations
systematically, therefore, he needed only to try one number in every five—
0, 5, 10, 15 … —to be sure of hitting the target. By thinking in terms of
error ranges, instead of accepting the authority of the numerals on the dial,
he brought a pragmatic physicist’s intuition to bear. That one insight
effectively reduced the total combinations from one million to a mere eight
thousand, almost few enough to try, given a few hours.

An American folklore had developed about safes and the yeggs who
cracked them. Through the cowboy era and the gangster era safes grew
thicker and more elaborate—double walls of cast iron and manganese,
triple side bolts and bottom bolts, curb tumblers and pressure handles—
and the legend, too, grew thicker and more elaborate. The consummate
safeman was thought to need sandpapered fingers and hypersensitive
ears. His essential skill: a feeling for the vibrations of tumblers lining up or
falling into place. This was pure myth. It was true that once in a long while
someone would open a safe by feel, but, the lore notwithstanding, the chief
tools of successful safecrackers were crowbars and drills. Safes were
cracked; holes were torn in their sides; handles and dials were torn off.
When all else failed, safes were burned. The safeman used “soup”—
nitroglycerin. The Los Alamos physicists had been conditioned by the
myth, and when word started spreading that the laboratory had a skilled
safecracker on its staff, most of them believed—and never stopped
believing—that Feynman had mastered the art of listening to the tiny clicks.

To learn how to crack safes he had to find his way past the same myth.
He read pulp memoirs of safemen to look for their secrets. They inspired
him to dreams of glory: these authors boasted about opening bullion-filled
safes underwater; he would write the book that would top them all. In its
preface he would intone, I opened the safes which contained behind them
the entire secret of the atomic bomb: the schedules for the production of
plutonium, the purification procedures, how much was going to be
needed, how the atomic bomb worked, how the neutrons are generated
… the whole schmeer. Only gradually, as he looked for the nuggets of
useful information, did he realize how mundane the business was.
Because his repertoire would have to omit drills and nitroglycerin, it would
have to make the most of such practical rules as he could find. Some he
read; others he learned as he went along. Most were variations on a
theme: People are predictable.

They tend to leave safes unlocked.
They tend to leave their combinations at factory settings such as 25-0-

25.

They tend to write down the combinations, often on the edge of their

desk drawers.

They tend to choose birthdays and other easily remembered numbers.
This last insight alone made an enormous difference. Of the 8,000
effective possible combinations, Feynman figured that only 162 worked as
dates. The first number was a month from 1 to 12—given the margin of
error, that meant he need try just three possibilities, 0, 5, and 10. For a day
from 1 to 31 he needed six; for a year from 1900 to the present, just nine.
He could try 3 × 6 × 9 combinations in minutes. He also discovered that it
took just a few inexplicable successes to make a safecracker’s reputation.
By fiddling with his own safe he learned that when a door was open he
could find the last number of a combination by turning the dial and feeling
when the bolt came down. Given some time, he could find the second
number that way, too. He made a habit of absently leaning against his
colleagues’ safes when he visited their offices, twirling the dials like the
perpetual fidgeter he was, and thus he built up a master list of partial
combinations. The remaining trial and error was so trivial that he found
himself—for the sake of cultivating his legend—carrying tools as red
herrings and pretending that safe jobs took longer than they really did.

The Last Springtime

Friday afternoon again. Gravel switchbacks wound perilously down the
mesa. Across a desert spotted with pale green bristles, the Sangre de
Cristo Mountains rose like luminous cutouts thirty miles to the east, as
bright as if they were a few city blocks away. The air was clearer than any
Feynman had seen. The scenery left emotional fingerprints on many of the
Easterners and Europeans who lived in its spell for two years. When it
snowed, the shades of whiteness seemed impossibly rich. Feynman
reveled in the clouds skimming low across the valley, the mountains visible
above and below the clouds at once, the velvet glow of cloud-diffused
moonlight. The sight stirred something within the most rational of minds.
He mocked himself for feeling it: See, I’m getting an aesthetic sense. The
days blurred, especially now—no more banker’s hours, not much theory to
divert the mind. The pace of computation was hectic. Feynman’s day
began at 8:30 and ended fifteen hours later. Sometimes he could not leave
the computing center at all. He worked through for thirty-one hours once
and the next day found that an error minutes after he went to bed had
stalled the whole team. The routine allowed just a few breaks: a hasty ride
across the mesa to help put out a chemical fire; or one of those Los
Alamos seminar-briefing-colloquium-town-meetings, where, slouching as
far as his frame would permit, he would sit in the second row next to a
detached-looking Oppenheimer; or a drive with his friend Fuchs to some
Indian caves, where they could explore on hands and knees until dusk.

Still, each Friday or Saturday, if he could, Feynman left this place
behind, making his way down the rutted road in Paul Olum’s little Chevrolet
coupe or sometimes now in Fuchs’s blue Buick. He turned over and over in
his mind some nagging puzzle and let his thoughts drift back to the hard
quantum problems he had left behind at Princeton. He made a difficult
mental transition to his weekend. The trips down from those heights
marked off full weeks for him, empty ones for Arline. He was like a spy
invented by a novelist: “not certain whether this time spent traveling
between his two secret worlds was when he was truly himself, when he was
able to hold the two in balance and know them to be separate from himself;

or whether this was the one time he was nothing at all, a void traveling
between two points.” Later, when Fuchs, shockingly, turned out to have
been a spy for the Soviet Union, Feynman thought it might not have been
so strange after all that his friend had been able to hide his inner thoughts
so well. He, too, had felt he was leading a double life. His anguish over
Arline, so dominating his mind, stayed invisible to the colleagues who saw
his aggressively carefree self. He would sit in a group and look at
someone—even at Fuchs—and think, how easy it is to hide my thoughts
from others. A third springtime was coming to Los Alamos, and Feynman
knew it would be the last. For a moment he thought he felt a break in the
tension. He found a way to get the computation group running smoothly
enough to allow him a few hours more sleep. He took a shower. For a half
hour he read a book before falling asleep. It seemed, just for a moment,
that the worst might be over. He wrote Arline:

You are a strong and beautiful woman. You are not always as
strong as other times but it rises & falls like the flow of a mountain
stream. I feel I am a resevoir for your strength—without you I would be
empty and weak … I find it much harder these days to write these
things to you.

He never wrote without saying I love you or I’m still loving you or I have a
serious affliction: loving you forever. The pace quickened again, and
Feynman sometimes thought about long days he had worked for twenty
dollars a week waiting on tables and helping in the kitchen of his aunt’s
summer hotel, the Arnold, on the beach at Far Rockaway. Wherever he
went, his drumming could be heard through the walls, nervous or jaunty, a
rapping that his staff had to enjoy or endure. It was not music. Feynman
himself could barely endure the more standard tunes of his friend Julius
Ashkin’s recorder, “an infernally popular wooden tube,” he called it, “for
making noises bearing a one-one correspondence to black dots on a
piece of paper—in imitation to music.”

Stresses were tightening, too, between the security staff and the
scientists, and Feynman had lost his eager spirit of cooperation. A
colleague had been interrogated for more than an hour in a smoky room,
questions fired by men sitting in the dark, as in a melodramatic movie.

“Don’t get scared tho,” Feynman wrote Arline, “they haven’t found out that I
am a relativist yet.” Fear sometimes clutched Feynman now. His intestines
suffered chronically. He had a chest X ray: clear. Names rushed through
his head: maybe Donald; if a girl, maybe Matilda. Putzie wasn’t drinking
enough milk—how could he help her build her strength at this distance?
They were spending $200 a month on the room and oxygen and $300
more on nurses, and $300 was the shortfall between income and
expenditures. His salary as a Manhattan Project group leader: $380 a
month. If they spent Arline’s savings, $3,300 plus a piano and a ring, they
could cover ten more months. Arline seemed to be wasting away.

Letters went back and forth almost daily. They wrote like a boy and a girl
without experience at the art of love letters. They catalogued the everyday
—how much sleep, how much money. Macy’s sent Arline an unexpected
mail-order refund of forty-four cents: I feel like a millionaire … I.O.U. 22¢.
His sporadic bad digestion or swollen eyelid; her waning or waxing
strength, her coughed-up blood and her access to oxygen. They used
matching stationery. It was a mail-order project of Arline’s—soon most of
her relatives and many of Richard’s friends on the hill had the same green
or brown block letterhead from the Dollar Stationery Company. For herself
she ordered both formal (Mrs. Richard P. Feynman) and informal, with the
same legend she had once caught Richard slicing from her pencils:

RICHARD DARLING,

I LOVE YOU
PUTZIE

She decorated the envelopes with red hearts and silver stars. The army
decorated them with tape: OPENED BY U. S. ARMY EXAMINER.

They called each other “Dope” and then worried about whether they had
given offense. You’re never that—just silly & cute & lots of fun—you know
what I mean, don’t you coach? Alone in her cramped sanatorium room,
decorated with a few pictures and knickknacks received as wedding gifts,
Arline worried about Richard and other women. He was a popular dancer
at Los Alamos parties; he flirted intently with nurses, wives, and a secretary
of Oppenheimer’s. All it took to set Arline’s mind racing was an offhand
mention of the wife of a colleague. Or worse: the scientists were in an

uproar over the appearance of M.P.’s around a women’s dormitory (the
army had discovered an active prostitution trade there), and for some
reason Richard had been chosen to lead the protest. He reassured her
continually. Everything is under control—& I love you only. She explained
and reexplained the facts of their love like an incantation: he is tall, gentle,
kind, strong; he supports her, but once in a while can lean on her, too; he
must confide everything in her, as she has slowly learned to confide in him;
we have to think in terms of us, always; she loves the way he stretches
casually to open a high window beyond her reach, and she loves the way
he talks babytalk with her.

Not until the beginning of this grim year did they make love. Their
gingerly discussions had led nowhere. He was afraid of taking advantage,
or afraid of harming her, or just afraid. Arline grasped ever more tightly her
sense of romantic love. She read Lady Chatterley’s Lover (“No!” she said.
“Love me! Love me, and say you’ll keep me. Say you’ll keep me! Say you’ll
never let me go, to the world nor to anybody!”) and a popular 1943 book,
Love in America. “I do not know—although there are those who profess to
know with mathematical accuracy—whether sex is all-important in the life
of a man or a woman,” the author wrote provocatively. Americans lag
Europeans in such matters. “We have developed no concepts of love as
an art or a rite… . We do not seem to realize that woman’s love is not
prompted by good deeds on a man’s part or by Boy Scout conduct; that
neither gratitude nor pity are love; that loving lies in demanding as well as
in giving; that the woman who loves yearns to give and give again.”

Arline herself finally made the decision and set aside a Sunday when
she would allow no other visitors. She missed him spiritually and physically,
she told him.

Darling I’m beginning to think that perhaps this restlessness I feel
within myself is due to pent up emotions—I really think we’d both feel
happier and better dear if we released our desires.

She wrote Richard a few days before to tell him it was time. She could not
sleep. She clipped a phrase from a newspaper advertisement: “OUR
MARRIAGE COMES FIRST.” She reminded him of the future that waited for them:
just a few more years in bed for her; then he would be a renowned

professor (physicist still did not denote a profession with stature) and she
a mother. She apologized, as she so often did, for being moody, for being
difficult, for saying hurtful things, and for having to lean on him without
respite. Her thoughts rambled.

… We have to fight hard—every inch of the way—we can’t slip
ever—a slip costs too much… . I’ll be all a women would be to you—I’ll
always be your sweetheart & first love—besides a devoted wife—we’ll
be proud parents too—we’ll fight to make Donald real—I want him to
be like you… . I am proud of you always Richard—your a good
husband, and lover, & well, coach, I’ll show you what I mean Sunday.

Your Putzie

False Hopes

Her health continued to fail. “Drink some milk!” Richard wrote in May. Her
weight had fallen to eighty-four pounds. She looked like a woman starving.

You are a nice girl. Every time I think about you, I feel good. It must

be love. It sounds like a definition of love. It is love. I love you.

I’ll see you in two days.
R. P. F.

More and more they talked of medical tests. They needed optimism. He
was near despair. Time passes fast. Maybe we should start looking for
another doctor… . Why don’t you drink an extra bottle of milk right now
while you are thinking of it.

The scientific knowledge that empowered the physicists seemed to
mean nothing on the soft soil of medicine. With the final desperation of the
dying, Richard and Arline reached out for slender possibilities. He had
heard about a new drug, sulf-something—he was not sure—and had
written to researchers in the East, who told him apologetically that studies
of sulfabenamide were in the most preliminary stage. The discovery that
substances of the sulfonamide family retarded bacterial growth was not yet
a decade old. They were destined to prove poor substitutes for true
antibiotics.

Now Richard was writing to faraway doctors again. It seemed that Arline
was pregnant. After ending the celibacy of their marriage, she had
immediately missed her menstrual period. Was it possible? They were
frightened and jubilant at once. Richard did not tell his parents, but he told
his sister, now a college student. Joan was dazzled at the prospect of
becoming an aunt. They talked about names and began making new
plans. Yet to Richard it still seemed that Arline was wasting away. He
thought he saw symptoms of starvation. Perhaps no rational observer
could have construed the cessation of menses at this stage of the disease
as a sign of pregnancy, but that was how they construed it. The alternative
was so grim. Their doctors saw little reason for hopefulness. The chief
physician from the sanatorium in Browns Mills, New Jersey, advised
urgently that any pregnancy must be “interrupted”—“have it done by a
specialist.” Then a pregnancy test gave a negative result after all. They did
not know what to think. A doctor at Los Alamos told Richard that the tests
were notoriously unreliable but that they could try again at an Albuquerque
laboratory. He thought the laboratory had the necessary rabbits for the
Friedman test.

The same doctor said he had heard of a new substance made from
mold growths—“streptomicin”?—that seemed to cure tuberculosis in
guinea pigs. If it worked, the doctor thought it might soon become widely
available. Arline refused to believe the negative pregnancy result. She
wrote cryptic remarks about “P.S. 59-to-be.” The same day a nurse wrote
Feynman from the sanatorium to say that Arline had been spitting blood.
He opened his encyclopedia yet again. Nothing. He drifted through the
pages: tuberculosis, tuff, tularemia … Tuff was a kind of volcanic rock;
Tunicata an animal group. He wrote Arline another letter. “Tumors you
know about & Turkey, the country, also.” Some days she was now too
weak even to write back. He grasped his uncertainty. Not knowing was
frustration, anguish, and finally his only solace.

“Keep hanging on,” he wrote. “Nothing is certain. We lead a charmed

life.”

In the midst of their private turmoil came V-E day and then Richard’s
twenty-seventh birthday. Arline had prepared another mail-order surprise:
the laboratory was flooded with newspapers—handed about and tacked to
walls—proclaiming with banner headlines, “Entire Nation Celebrates Birth

of R. P. Feynman!” The war in Europe, having provided so many of the
scientists with their moral purpose, had now ended. The bloody circle was
closing in the Pacific. They needed no threat of a German or Japanese
bomb to urge them onward. Uranium was arriving. There would be one test
—one last experiment.

At the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota another kind of experiment was under
way, the first clinical trial of streptomycin, a substance that had been
discovered nearly two years before, in August 1943. The population
participating in the trial: two patients. Both had been near death from
tuberculosis when the experiment began in the fall of 1944; both were
improving rapidly. Even so, it was not until the next August that the Mayo
trial had expanded to as many as thirty patients. The doctors could see
lesions healing and lungs clearing. A year after that, the study of
streptomycin as an antitubercular agent had become the most extensive
research project ever devoted to a drug and a disease. Researchers were
treating more than one thousand patients. In 1947 streptomycin was
released to the public.

Streptomycin’s discovery, like penicillin’s a few years earlier, had been
delayed by medicine’s slow embrace of the scientific method. Physicians
had just begun to comprehend the power of controlled experiments
repeated thousands of times. The use of statistics to uncover any but the
grossest phenomena remained alien. The doctor who first isolated the
culture he named Streptomyces griseus, by cultivating some organisms
swabbed from the throat of a chicken, had seen the same microbes in a
soil sample in 1915 and had recognized even then that they had a
tendency to kill disease-causing bacteria. A generation had to pass before
medicine systematized its study of such microbes, by screening them,
culturing them, and measuring their antibiotic strengths in carefully labeled
rows of test tubes.

Nuclear Fear

In its infancy, too, was the branch of science that would have to devote
itself to the safety, short-term and long-term, of humans in the presence of
nuclear radiation. The sense of miasmic dread that would become part of

the cultural response to radioactivity lay in the future. The Manhattan
Project’s researchers handled their heavy new substances with a
breeziness that bordered on the cavalier. Workers handling plutonium
were supposed to wear coveralls, gloves, and a respirator. Even so, some
were overexposed. The prototype reactors leaked radioactive material.
Scientists occasionally ignored or misread their radiation badges. Criticalmass experiments always flirted with danger, and by later standards the
safety precautions were flimsy. Experimentalists assembled perfect
shining cubes of uranium into near-critical masses by hand. One man,
Harry Daghlian, working alone at night, let slip one cube too many,
frantically grabbed at the mound to halt the chain reaction, saw the
shimmering blue aura of ionization in the air, and died two weeks later of
radiation poisoning. Later Louis Slotin used a screwdriver to prop up a
radioactive block and lost his life when the screwdriver slipped. Like so
many of these worldly scientists he had performed a faulty kind of risk
assessment, unconsciously mis-multiplying a low probability of accident
(one in a hundred? one in twenty?) by a high cost (nearly infinite).

To make measurements of a fast reaction, the experimenters designed
a test nicknamed the dragon experiment after a coolly ominous comment
of Feynman’s that they would be “tickling the tail of a sleeping dragon.” It
required someone to drop a slug of uranium hydride through a closely
machined ring of the same substance. Gravity would be the agent in
achieving supercriticality, and gravity, it was hoped, would carry the slug on
through to a safe ending. Feynman himself proposed a safer experiment
that would have used an absorber made of boron to turn a supercritical
material into a subcritical one. By measuring how rapidly the neutron
multiplication died out, it would have been possible to calculate the
multiplication rate that would have existed without boron. The arithmetical
inference would have served as a shield. It was dubbed the Feynman
experiment, and it was not carried out. Time was too short.

Los Alamos hardly posed the most serious new safety challenges, for all
its subsequent visibility. These belonged to the vast new factory cities—
Oak Ridge, Tennessee, and Hanford, Washington—where plants thrown
up across thousands of acres now manufactured uranium and plutonium in
bulk. Compounds and solutions of these substances were accumulating in
metal barrels, glass bottles, and cardboard boxes piled on the cement

floors of storerooms. Uranium was combined with oxygen or chlorine and
either dissolved in water or kept dry. Workers moved these substances
from centrifuges or drying furnaces into cans and hoppers. Much later,
large epidemiological studies would overcome obstacles posed by
government secrecy and disinformation to show that low-level radiation
caused more harm than anyone had imagined. Yet the authorities at the
processing plants were overlooking not only this possibility but also a more
immediate and calculable threat: the possibility of a runaway, explosive
chain reaction.

Feynman had seemed to be everywhere at once as the pace of work
accelerated in 1944 and 1945. At Teller’s request he gave a series of
lectures on the central issues of bomb design and assembly: the criticalmass calculations for both metal and hydride; the differences between
reactions in pile, water boiler, and gadget; how to compute the effects of
various tamper materials in reflecting neutrons back into the reactions; how
to convert the pure theoretical calculations into the practical realities of the
gun method and the implosion method. He became responsible for
calculating the way the efficiency of a uranium bomb would depend on the
concentration of uranium 235 and for estimating safe amounts of
radioactive materials under a variety of conditions. When Bethe had to
assign theorists to G Division (Weapon Physics Division—G for gadget)
he assigned Feynman to four different groups. Furthermore, he let
Oppenheimer know that, as far as the implosion itself was concerned, “It is
expected that a considerable fraction of the new work coming in will be
carried out by group T-4 (Feynman).” Meanwhile, though Feynman was
officially only a consultant to the group handling computation by IBM
machines, Bethe decreed that Feynman would now have “complete
authority.”

At Oak Ridge, where the first batches of enriched uranium were
accumulating, a few officials began to consider some of the problems that
might arise. One letter that made its way to Los Alamos from Oak Ridge
opened, “Dear Sir, At the present time no provisions have been made in
the 9207 Area for stopping reactions resulting from the bringing together
by accident of an unsafe quantity of material… .” Would it make sense,
asked the writer—a plant superintendent with the Tennessee Eastman
fire-extinguishing
install some kind of advanced 
Corporation—to 

equipment, possibly using special chemicals? Oppenheimer recognized
the peril waiting in such questions. He brought in Teller and Emilio Segrè,
head of the experimental division’s radioactivity group. Segrè paid an
inspection visit, other theorists were assigned, and finally the problem was
turned over to Feynman, with his expertise in critical-mass calculations.

As Segrè had discovered, 

the army’s compartmentalization of
information created a perilous combination of circumstances at Oak
Ridge. Workers there did not know that the substance they were wheeling
about in large bottles of greenish liquid was grist for a bomb. A few
officials did know but assumed that they could ensure safety by never
assembling any amount close to the critical mass estimated by the
physicists. They lacked knowledge that had become second nature to the
experts at Los Alamos: that the presence of hydrogen, as in water, slowed
neutrons to dangerously effective speeds and so reduced the amount of
uranium 235 needed to sustain a reaction. Segrè astounded his Oak
Ridge hosts by telling them that their accumulating stores of wet uranium,
edging closer to bomb-grade purity, were likely to explode.

Feynman began by retracing Segrè’s steps and found that the problem
was even worse than reported. In one place Segrè had been led into the
same storeroom twice and had inadvertently noted two batches as though
they were accumulating in separate rooms. Through dozens of rooms in a
series of buildings Feynman saw drums with 300 gallons, 600 gallons,
3,000 gallons. He made drawings of their precise arrangements on floors
of brick or wood; calculated the mutual influence of solid pieces of uranium
metal stored in the same room; tracked the layouts of agitators,
evaporators, and centrifuges; and met with engineers to study blueprints
for plants under construction. He realized that the plant was headed toward
a catastrophe. At some point the buildup of uranium would cause a nuclear
reaction that would release heat and radioactivity at near-explosive speed.
In answer to the Eastman superintendent’s question about extinguishing a
reaction, he wrote that dumping cadmium salts or boron into the uranium
might help, but that a supercritical reaction could run away too quickly to be
halted by chemicals. He considered seemingly remote contingencies:
“During centrifuging some peculiar motion of the centrifuge might possibly
gather metal together in one lump, possibly near the center.” The
nightmare was that two batches, individually safe, might accidentally be

combined. He asked what each possible stuck valve or missing supervisor
might mean. In a few places he found that the procedures were too
conservative. He noted minute details of the operations. “Is CT-1 empty
when we drop from WK-1… ? Is P-2 empty when solt’n is transfered … ?
Supervisor OK’s solution of P-2’s ppt. Under what circumstances?”
Eventually, meeting with senior army officers and company managers, he
laid out a detailed program for ensuring safety. He also invented a
practical method—using, once again, a variational method to solve an
otherwise unsolvable integral equation—that would let engineers make a
conservative approximation, on the spot, of the safe levels of bomb
material stored in various geometrical layouts. A few people, long
afterward, thought he had saved their lives.

Wielding the authority of Los Alamos was an instructive experience.
Feynman’s first visit to Oak Ridge was his first ride on an airplane, and the
thrill was heightened by his special-priority military status on the flight, with
a satchel of secret documents actually strapped to his back under his shirt.
Oppenheimer had briefed his young protégé with care. Feynman decided
that the plant could not be operated safely by people kept ignorant of the
nature of their work, and he insisted that the army allow briefings on basic
nuclear physics. Oppenheimer had armed him with a means of handling
difficult negotiations:

“You should say: Los Alamos cannot accept the responsibility for

the safety of the Oak Ridge plant unless——”

“… You mean me, little Richard, is going to go in there and say——”
“… Yes, little Richard, you go in there and do that.”

John von Neumann may have advised him during their thin-air walks that
there could be honor in irresponsibility, but amid the barrels and carboys of
the world’s first nuclear hoards, responsibility caught up with him. Lives
depended on his methods and judgments. What if his estimates were not
conservative enough? The plant designers had taken his calculations as
fact. He hovered outside himself, a young man watching, unsure and giddy,
while someone carried off an impersonation of an older, more powerful
man. As he said, recalling the feeling many years later, he had to grow up
fast.

The possibility of death at Oak Ridge tormented him more urgently than
the mass slaughter to come. Sometime that spring it struck him that the
seedy El Fidel hotel, where he had nonchalantly roomed on his trips to
Albuquerque, was a firetrap. He could not stay there any more.

I Will Bide My Time

Hitchhiking back one Sunday night, nearing the unpaved turnoff to Los
Alamos, he saw the lights of a carnival shining from a few miles north in
Espanola. Years had passed since he and Arline last went to a carnival,
and he could not resist. He rode a rickety Ferris wheel and spun about in a
machine that whirled metal chairs hanging on chains. He decided not to
play the hoop-toss game, with unappealing Christ figures as prizes. He
saw some children staring at an airplane device and bought them a ride. It
all made him think sadly about Arline. Later he got a lift home with three
women. “But they were kind of ugly,” he wrote Arline, “so I remained faithful
without even having the fun of exerting will power to do it.”

A week later he rebuked her for some act of weakness and then,

miserable, wrote the last letter she would read.

My Wife:
I am always too slow… . I understand at last how sick you are. I
understand that this is not the time to ask you to make any effort to be
less of a bother to others… . It is a time to comfort you as you wish to
be comforted, not as I think you should wish to be comforted. It is a
time to love you in any way that you wish. Whether it be by not seeing
you or by holding your hand or whatever.

This time will pass—you will get better. You don’t believe it, but I do.
So I will bide my time & yell at you later and now I am your lover
devoted to serving you in your hardest moments… .

I am sorry to have failed you, not to have provided the pillar you
need to lean upon. Now, I am a man upon whom you can rely, have
trust, faith, that I will not make you unhappy any longer when you are so
sick. Use me as you will. I am your husband.

I adore a great and patient woman. Forgive me for my slowness to

understand.

I am your husband. I love you.

He also wrote to his mother, breaking a long silence. One night he awoke
at 3:45 A.M. and could not get back to sleep—he did not know why—so he
washed socks until dawn.

His computing team had put everything aside to concentrate on one final
problem: the likely energy of the device to be exploded a few weeks hence
at Alamogordo in the first and only trial of the atomic bomb. The group’s
productivity had risen many times since he took over. He had invented a
system for sending three problems through the machine simultaneously. In
the annals of computing this was an ancestor to what would later be called
parallel processing or pipelining. He made sure that the component
operations of an ongoing computation were standardized, so that they
could be used with only slight variations in different computations, and he
had his team use color-coded cards, with a different color for each
problem. The cards circled the room in a multicolored sequence, small
batches occasionally having to pass other batches like impatient golfers
playing through. He also invented an efficient technique for correcting
errors without halting a run. Because a mistake only propagated a certain
distance in each cycle, when an error was found it would have tainted only
certain cards. Thus he was able to substitute small new card decks that
eventually caught up with the main computation.

He was at work in the computing room when the call came from
Albuquerque that Arline was dying. He had arranged to borrow Klaus
Fuchs’s car. When he reached her room she was still. Her eyes barely
followed him as he moved. He sat with her for hours, aware of the minutes
passing on her clock, aware of something momentous that he could not
quite feel. He heard her breaths stop and start, heard her efforts to
swallow, and tried to think about the science of it, the individual cells
starved of air, the heart unable to pump. Finally he heard a last small
breath, and a nurse came and said that Arline was dead. He leaned over
to kiss her and made a mental note of the surprising scent of her hair,
surprising because it was the same as always.

The nurse recorded the time of death, 9:21 P.M. He discovered, oddly,
that the clock had halted at that moment—just the sort of mystical

phenomenon that appealed to unscientific people. Then an explanation
occurred to him. He knew the clock was fragile, because he had repaired it
several times, and he decided that the nurse must have stopped it by
picking it up to check the time in the dim light.

The next day he arranged an immediate cremation and collected her few
possessions. He returned to Los Alamos late at night. A party was under
way at the dormitory. He came in and sat down, looking shattered. His
computing team, he found the next day, was deep in a computing run, not
needing his help. He let his friends know that he wanted no special
attention. In her papers he found a small spiral notebook she had used to
log her medical condition. He carefully penned a final entry: “June 16—
Death.”

He returned to work, but soon Bethe ordered him home to Far
Rockaway for a rest. (His family did not know he was coming until the
telephone rang and a foreign-accented voice asked for him. Joan replied
that her brother had not been home for years. The voice said, When he
comes in, tell him Johnny von Neumann called.) There Richard stayed
for several weeks, until a coded telegram arrived. He flew from New York
Saturday night and reached Albuquerque at noon the next day, July 15. An
army car met him and drove him directly to Bethe’s house. Rose Bethe
had made sandwiches. Feynman was barely in time to catch the bus to the
observation site, a ridge overlooking the patch of New Mexican desert, the
Jornada del Muerto, already called by its more modern name, ground zero.

We Scientists Are Clever

The test seared images into all their memories: for Bethe the perfect
shade of ionized violet; for Weisskopf the eerie Tchaikovsky waltz and the
unbidden memory of the halo in a medieval painting of Christ’s ascension;
for Otto Frisch the cloud rising on its tornado stem of dust; for Feynman the
awareness of his “scientific brain” trying to calm his “befuddled one,” and
then the sound he felt in his bones; for so many of them the erect figure of
Fermi, letting his bits of paper slip through the wind. Fermi measured the
displacement, consulted a table he had prepared in his notebook, and
estimated that the first atomic bomb had released the energy of 10,000

tons of TNT, somewhat more than the theorists had predicted and
somewhat less than later measurements would suggest. Two days later,
calculating that the ground radiation should have decayed sufficiently, he
drove with Bethe and Weisskopf to inspect the glazed area that Feynman
saw from an observation plane. The molten sand, the absent tower. Later a
small monument marked the spot.

The aftermath changed them all. Everyone had played a part. If a man
had merely calculated a numerical table of corrections for the effect of wind
on the aerodynamically clumsy Nagasaki bomb, the memory would never
leave him. No matter how innocent they remained through the days of
Trinity and Hiroshima, those who had worked on the hill had knowledge
that they could not keep from themselves. They knew they had been
complicit in the final bringing of fire; Oppenheimer gave public lectures
explaining that the legend of Prometheus had been fulfilled. They knew,
despite their labors and ingenuity, how easy it had all been.

The official report on its development stated later that year that the bomb
was a weapon “created not by the devilish inspiration of some warped
genius but by the arduous labor of thousands of normal men and women
working for the safety of their country.” Yet they were not normal men and
women. They were scientists, and some already sensed that a dark
association like a smoke cloud would attach itself to the hitherto-innocent
word physicist. (A draft of the same report had said, “The general attitude
of Americans toward their scientists is a curious mixture of exaggerated
admiration and amused contempt”—never again was it quite so amused.)
Not long after writing his triumphant letter home, Feynman wrote some
arithmetic on a yellow pad. He estimated that a Hiroshima bomb in mass
production would cost as much as one B-29 superfortress bomber. Its
destructive force surpassed the power of one thousand airplanes carrying
ten-ton loads of conventional bombs. He understood the implications. “No
monopoly,” he wrote. “No defense.” “No security until we have control on a
world level.”

Under the heading “SKILL & KNOWLEDGE” he concluded:
Most was known… . Other peoples are not being hindered in the
development of the bomb by any secrets we are keeping. They might
be helped a little by our mentioning which of two processes is found to
be more efficient, & by our telling them what size parts to plan for—but

soon they will be able to do to Columbus, Ohio, and hundreds of cities
like it what we did to Hiroshima.

And we scientists are clever—too clever—are you not satisfied? Is
four square miles in one bomb not enough? Men are still thinking. Just
tell us how big you want it!

Many of the scientists found their magic mountain hard to leave.
Lingering for months, they continued minor research that had acquired its
own momentum, or skied near the Valle Grande, where they were
intermittently aware that their tow rope had previously served to hoist the
bomb up the tower at ground zero. Some joined the hydrogen bomb
project that Teller would lead, and some remained at Los Alamos
permanently, as the compound behind the fence grew into a major national
laboratory and a central fixture of the American weapons-research
establishment. The scientists who slowly dispersed began to realize how
unlikely they were to work ever again in such a purposeful, collegial, and
passionate scientific enterprise.

Nothing held Feynman to Los Alamos. He was joining Bethe’s faculty at
Cornell. Raymond Birge at Berkeley had angered Oppenheimer by
delaying the job offer he had recommended. Oppenheimer wrote again: “It
would seem to me that under these circumstances too much of courage
was not required in making a commitment to a young scientist… . I
perhaps presumed too much on the excellence of his reputation among
those to whom he is known… . He is not only an extremely brilliant theorist,
but a man of the greatest robustness, responsibility and warmth, a brilliant
and lucid teacher … one of the most responsible men I have ever met… .
We regard him as invaluable here; he has been given a responsibility and
his work carries a weight far beyond his years… .” Birge finally came
through with an offer to Feynman that summer, but too late. When Arline
was alive they had talked about moving to California for her health. Now
Bethe easily swayed him.

Feynman became the first of the group leaders to leave, in October
1945. There were only a few reports to write up and some final safety tours
of Oak Ridge and Hanford. It was on his last trip to Oak Ridge, as he
walked past a shop window, that he happened to see a pretty dress.
Before he could prevent it, a thought came. Arline would like that. For the

first time since her death, he wept.

CORNELL

For physics as an enterprise within American culture there were two eras.
One ended and the other began in the summer of the atomic bombs.
Politicians, educators, newspaper editors, priests, and the scientists
themselves began to understand the divide that had been crossed.

“Among the divinities of ancient Greece, there was a Titan named
Prometheus,” ran a typical essay in The Christian Century the next winter.
“He stole fire from heaven and gave it to man… . For this act, Prometheus
has been held in highest honor as a benefactor of humanity and the divine
patron of science and learning.” No more. Now, rather to the cleric
essayist’s delight, the atomic bomb had humbled Prometheus’s heirs, the
scientists. Their centuries of progress had decisively ended with their
invention of a device of human self-destruction. Now it was time for
Christian ministers to step in. Even the scientists, he said, “have for the
first time in history turned aside from their vocation and become statesmen
and evangelists, preaching the grim gospel of damnation unless men
repent.” Here he was alluding to J. Robert Oppenheimer, for Oppenheimer
had already seen the aptness of the Promethean legend—who could have
missed it?—and had begun to speak out both to the public and to
scientists. What Oppenheimer preached, however, was more subtle than a
gospel of damnation. He reminded listeners that the religious had long felt
threatened by science, and now the only mildly God-fearing public had
something real to fear. He suspected that atomic weapons would scare
people more than any scientific development since Darwin’s theory of
evolution.

Already, in November 1945, with relieved soldiers and sailors streaming
home from the Pacific Theater, before fallout shelters, nuclear proliferation,
and ban the bomb had a chance to enter the language, Oppenheimer
anticipated the time when celebration would give way to dread. “Atomic
weapons are a peril which affect everyone in the world,” he told his friends
and colleagues of the past thirty months. His audience filled the largest
assembly hall in Los Alamos, its movie theater. He knew that the

newspapers and magazines glorifying the scientists’ achievement would
soon recognize how little real mystery there had been, how unremarkable,
actually, were the problems of nuclear fission (if not implosion), how easy
atomic bombs would be to make, and how affordable for many nations.

Prometheus was not the only mythic figure standing in for the scientist;
the other was Faust. Lately the Faustian bargain for knowledge and power
had not seemed so horrible as it had in medieval times. Knowledge meant
washing machines and medicines, and the devil had softened into an
amusing character for Saturday cartoons and Broadway musicals. But now
the fires in two Japanese cities renewed a primal understanding that the
devil was not so tame. It might mean something, after all, to sell him one’s
soul. Oppenheimer knew, partly from introspection, that the scientists had
immediately begun to question their own motives. “It’s a terrible thing that
we made,” Robert Wilson had said to Feynman, surprising him and
pricking his ebullient bubble. Others were beginning 
to agree.
Oppenheimer reminded them of what they were reminding themselves:
that two years earlier a Nazi bomb had seemed possible and that the
American victory had seemed far from inevitable. He acknowledged that
these justifications had faded. Some people, he said, might have been
driven by a less high-minded motivation, no more than curiosity and a
sense of adventure, and he surprised some of them by saying, “and rightly
so.” He said it again: “And rightly so.” Feynman had left Los Alamos
several days before, so he did not hear, nor did he need to hear, Oppy’s
reminder of their shared credo, a credo now being welded to the most
painful act of self-justification they had ever had to perform:

When you come right down to it the reason that we did this job is
because it was an organic necessity. If you are a scientist you cannot
stop such a thing. If you are a scientist you believe that it is good to
find out how the world works; that it is good to find out what the
realities are; that it is good to turn over to mankind at large the
greatest possible power to control the world… . It is not possible to be
a scientist unless you believe that the knowledge of the world, and the
power which this gives, is a thing which is of intrinsic value to
humanity, and that you are using it to help in the spread of knowledge,
and are willing to take the consequences.

Thus spoke a bringer of fire.

The relations between Americans and their scientists had changed. It
became an instant truism that science meant power. Science as an
institution—“organized science”—ranked second only to the military as a
guarantor of what was being called national security. President Harry S
Truman told the Congress that fall that America’s role in the world would
depend directly on research coordinated by universities, industrial
companies, and the government: “The events of the past few years are
both proof and prophecy of what science can do.” In short order the
government established an Atomic Energy Commission, an Office of
Naval Research, and a National Science Foundation. Permanent national
laboratories with no precedent in the prewar world arose at Los Alamos; at
Oak Ridge; at Argonne, south of Chicago; at Berkeley; and at Brookhaven,
Long Island, on a six-thousand-acre former army site. Money flowed
copiously. Before the war the government had paid for only a sixth of all
scientific research. By the war’s end the proportions had flipped: only a
sixth was financed by all nongovernment sources combined. The
government and the public gained a new sense of proprietorship over the
whole scientific enterprise. As physicists began to speak out about world
government and the international control of nuclear arms, so an army of
clerics, foundation heads, and congressmen now made the mission and
the morality of science a part of their lecture-circuit repertoire.

On the whole, the popular press lionized Oppenheimer and his
colleagues. To have worked on the bomb gave a scientist a stature
matched only by the Nobel Prize. By comparison it was nothing to have
created radar at the MIT Radiation Laboratory, though by a plausible
calculus radar had done more to win the war. The word physicist itself
finally came into vogue. Einstein was now understood to be a physicist, not
a mathematician. Even nonnuclear physicists acquired prestige by
association. Soon Wilson, Feynman’s recruiter, would look back wistfully to
“the quiet times when physics was a pleasant, intellectual subject, not
unlike the study of Medieval French in its popular interest.” The atomic
scientists felt the guilt that flowed from the sudden deaths of at least one
hundred thousand residents of Hiroshima and Nagasaki; meanwhile the
scientists found themselves hailed as hero wizards, and this was a more

complex role than many of them realized at first, containing as it did the
seeds of darker relationships. In less than a decade Oppenheimer himself
would lose his security clearance in the classic McCarthy-era auto-da-fé.
The public would find that knowledge created by scientists was a
commodity requiring special handling. It could be stamped CLASSIFIED or
betrayed to foreign enemies. Knowledge was the grist of secrets and the
currency of spies.

Theoretical physicists, too, had learned something about their kind of
knowledge. Oppenheimer reminded them of it, in his November 1945 talk
at Los Alamos. The nature of the work in theoretical physics before the war
had forced a certain recognition on them, he said—the recognition that
human language has limits, that people choose concepts that correspond
only faintly to things in the real world, like the shadows of ghosts. Before
the bomb work began, quantum mechanics had already altered the
relations between science and common sense. We make models of
experience, and we know that our models fail to meet the reality.

The University at Peace

Their remarkable change in status buffeted every American institution that
made a home for physicists. At Cornell, President Edmund Ezra Day was
one of the first to feel the force of the transition, in the stark contrast
between two budget meetings with his physicists, one during and one after
the war.

In the first, he sat down with his chief experimentalist, Robert F. Bacher,
who was setting off on his leave of absence; ultimately Bacher led the
bomb project’s experimental physics division. Bacher pleaded for a
cyclotron like those at Berkeley and Princeton. He pressed Day to find a
way of providing operating costs that he said might amount to as much as
a professor’s salary, from four thousand to five thousand dollars a year.

In the second, two months after Hiroshima, Day’s physicists told him that
a far more powerful accelerator would be required, along with a new
laboratory to house it. This time they asked for a capital expenditure of
$3,000,000 and an operating budget that would begin at $250,000. They
suggested, furthermore, that without this commitment they would have to

look elsewhere for a more propitious environment for nuclear science. The
trustees had no obvious source of funds, but after a heated meeting with
Day they voted unanimously to proceed. Day declared: “The problem is not
to control nuclear forces but to control nuclear physicists. They are in
tremendous demand, and at a frightful premium.” Bacher himself, after
returning to Cornell briefly, left for Washington to serve as the first scientist
on the newly formed Atomic Energy Commission. Three years later Cornell
had a new accelerator, a synchrotron. The trustees’ leap of faith had been
vindicated by generous funding from the Office of Naval Research. Three
years after that, the synchrotron had passed into obsolescence and a new
version was already under construction.

Feynman’s first glimpse of the postwar university came in the dead of
night before the start of classes in the fall of 1945. Ithaca was a village at
the dimmest reaches of a New York City boy’s sense of his state’s
geography, practically in Ohio. He made the journey by train, using the long
hours to begin sketching out a basic graduate course he was supposed to
teach in mathematical methods for physicists. He debarked with a single
suitcase and a self-conscious sense of being, finally, a professor. He
suppressed the urge to sling his bag over his shoulder as usual. Instead he
let a porter guide him to the rear seat of a taxicab. He told the driver to
take him to the biggest hotel in town.

In Ithaca, as in towns and cities across America that fall, the hotels and
short-term apartments were booked. Housing was scarce. With
demobilization college enrollments were exploding. Boom was in the air.
Even sleepy Ithaca seemed like a Western town amid the gold rush.
Cornell was building houses and barracks at emergency speed. The week
before Feynman arrived, five new barracks burned down. He tried a
second hotel. Then he realized he could not afford to wander by taxicab, so
he checked his suitcase and began to walk, past darkened houses and
dormitories. He realized he must have found Cornell. Huge raked piles of
leaves dotted the campus, and they started to look like beds—if only he
could find one out of the glare of the streetlights. Finally he spotted an open
building with couches in the lobby and asked the janitor if he could spend
the night on one. He explained awkwardly that he was a new professor.

The next morning he washed as well as he could in the public bathroom,
checked in at the physics department, and made his way to a campus

housing office in Willard Straight Hall, near the center of the sloping
campus. There a clerk told him haughtily that the housing situation was so
bad that last night a professor had had to sleep in the lobby. “Look, buddy,”
Feynman snapped back, “I’m that professor. Now do something for me.”
He was unpleasantly startled to realize that in a town Ithaca’s size he could
set off a rumor and circle back into its wake within a matter of hours. He
also began to realize that he was going to have to readjust his internal
clock. The war had left him with a sense of urgency about appointments
and deadlines. Even as ten thousand undergraduates arrived, Cornell
seemed slack. He was surprised to discover that the administration had
scheduled a full week with nothing for him to do but explore the campus
and prepare for classes. Speech patterns struck him as slow, with none of
the beep-beep-beep nervousness he had got used to. People took time to
talk about the weather.

His first months were lonely. None of his close colleagues had been in
such a hurry to begin postwar life. Even Bethe did not leave Los Alamos
for Cornell until December. The school year began late and stayed
unsettled. Space ran short. Workers subdivided rooms in Rockefeller Hall.
Closets became offices. Outside, three tennis courts gave way to hasty
wooden barracks. Feynman soon shared his dingy Rockefeller office with
a colleague from Los Alamos, Philip Morrison, who had carried the atomic
bomb’s plutonium core to Alamogordo in the back seat of an army sedan.
Morrison had been lured by the sweet, serious Bethe, so full of integrity—
and also by Feynman, though it now seemed, surprisingly, that Feynman
was depressed and lonely. Bethe sensed this, too, but few others noticed.
Later Bethe noted dryly, “Feynman depressed is just a little more cheerful
than any other person when he is exuberant.”

He spent time in the library reading the mildly bawdy Arabian Nights and
staring hopefully at women. Unlike most of the Ivy League universities,
Cornell had accepted women as undergraduates since its founding, after
the Civil War, though they automatically matriculated in the College of
Home Economics. He went to freshman dances and ate in the student
cafeteria. He looked younger than his twenty-seven years, and he did not
stand out amid all the returning servicemen. His dance partners looked
askance at what sounded like a line—that he was a physicist just back
from building the atomic bomb. He missed Arline. Even before leaving Los

Alamos he had begun dating other women—especially beautiful women, in
what some of his friends saw as a frenetic, razor-edge denial of grief.

A gulf had opened between Feynman and his mother. Lucille, after so
adamantly opposing Richard’s marriage, had written painfully on Arline’s
death:

… now I want you to know that I’m proud and glad you married her
& did what you could to make her short life happy. She worshipped
you. Forgive me for not seeing things your way. I was frightened for
you—for what you would have to bear. But you bore it so well. Now try
to face life without her …

Begging him to come home, she promised him piles of rice and sugar
buns and gave her word that no one would tell him to comb his hair. He did
come, briefly, for a few days in July. Then, in August, the news of the
atomic bomb broke over the household like a lightning storm. Friends and
relatives called almost continuously. Lucille tried in vain to get through to
Santa Fe by telephone. One cousin called from a wire-service office to
read a comment of Oppenheimer’s that had just come across the ticker.
After 11 P.M. the phone rang and a voice said, “This is the Princeton
Triangle. Is it true that your son R. P. Feynman had more gravy stains on
his gown that any other man at the Graduate College in 1940?” It was
another cousin.

“I have a sense of humor, too,” Lucille wrote to Richard, “but I don’t think

this is a funny occasion.”

I felt thrilled & frightened at your part in this tremendous thing. No
one can be really joyous. It is with horror that I listen to the death &
destruction the bomb has caused… . I pray that this horrible
destruction of man by man may be the climax of all such destruction…
. No wonder I thought you were nervous. Who wouldn’t be, playing
around in such a dangerous place.

The combination of pride and terror—the scientists, too, were feeling it that
night—stirred a remarkable memory. “It reminded me of the time I was
playing bridge in the living room & my child prodigy had a little fire in a
trash basket he was holding outside the window.

“By the way,” she added, “I don’t think you ever told me how you put it

out.”

Feynman did not stop at home on his way to Ithaca from New Mexico
that fall. At some point Lucille began to realize how much damage had
been done by her opposition to the marriage. Late one night, unable to
sleep, she got out of bed and penned an anguished letter—a love letter
from mother to son—beginning, “Richard, What has happened between
you and your family? What has driven us apart? My heart yearns for you… .
My heart is full to bursting & hot tears burn my eyes as I write.”

She wrote about his childhood: how much he had been wanted and
treasured; how she had read him beautiful stories; how Melville had made
patterns for him from colored tiles; how they had tried to invest him with a
sense of morality and duty. She reminded him of the pride they had felt in
all his achievements, from high school through graduate school.

More times than I can enumerate here my heart has leaped for joy
because of you… . And now—now—strange harvest that I reap. We
are as far apart as the poles.

Without mentioning Arline, she said she felt a sense of shame. “The fault
must be mine. Some where along the way I lost you.” Other mothers, she
said, had sons who loved them. Why not her? She closed with as
impassioned a plea as any spurned lover could make.

I need you. I want you. I will never give you up. Not even death can
break the bond between us… . Think of me sometimes & let me know
that you are thinking of me. My darling, oh my darling, what more can I
say to you. I adore you & always will.

He did go home for Christmas in 1945. Gradually the wound began to
heal. In the meantime Feynman made some indirect efforts to find his way
back into the unfinished theory that had occupied him at Princeton, but they
did not lead to anything usable. The culmination of the driven, purposeful
work of the past three years had left a void that he could not easily fill. He
found it hard to concentrate on research. As spring came he would sit on
the grass outdoors and worry about whether he had slipped past his best
working years without achieving anything. He had built a reputation among

senior physicists, but now, back in a world returning to normal, he realized
that he had not done the normal work to go with the reputation. Since his
two published papers in college—his squib on cosmic rays with Vallarta
and his undergraduate thesis—his only journal publications had been
accounts of the work with Wheeler on the absorber theory, already looking
short-lived.

Phenomena Complex—Laws Simple

If Feynman was struggling to find his footing, Julian Schwinger was not.
Since growing up at opposite ends of New York City, in neighborhoods
that might as well have been a thousand miles apart, they had become
competitors without either quite acknowledging it. Their routes into physics
had remained utterly separate, as had their styles. Schwinger, with heavy
owlish eyes and a mild stoop even in his twenties, took as great pains to
achieve elegance as Feynman did to remain rough-hewn. He dressed
carefully and expensively and drove a Cadillac. He worked nocturnally,
usually sleeping until late afternoon.His lectures had already become
famous for their seamlessness and uninterruptibility. He prided himself on
speaking without notes. A young Englishman who heard him (and who
considered Feynman’s ebullience slightly tiring, by contrast) thought
Schwinger became “a man possessed”—“It seems to be the spirit of
Macaulay which takes over, for he speaks in splendid periods, the carefully
architected sentences rolling on, with every subordinate clause duly
closing.” He liked to make his listeners think. He would never announce
directly that he had married and taken a honeymoon, when he could say, “I
abandoned my bachelor quarters and embarked on an accompanied,
nostalgic trip around the country… .” His equations had something of the
same style.

His patron had been I. I. Rabi, who never tired of describing their first
encounter: Schwinger, a seventeen-year-old waiting quietly in his office,
had finally piped up to settle an argument over a controversial foray into
quantum-mechanical paradox just published by Einstein, Boris Podolsky,
and Nathan Rosen. With the arrogance of a shy young man determined to
plow his own course, Schwinger was already in administrative difficulties

at City College because he rarely attended classes. Rabi helped him
transfer to Columbia and then took devilish pleasure in encouraging his
irate instructors to carry out their threats to flunk him. “Are you a mouse or a
man? Give him an F,” he told one dull chemistry professor; he judged
correctly that the grade would come to haunt the professor more than it
would the student. Even before Schwinger got his college diploma at the
age of nineteen, Rabi was having him fill in as the lecturer in his quantummechanics course. Also before graduating, he completed the research that
served as his doctoral dissertation. Fermi, Teller, and Bethe each knew
him, knew his work, or had collaborated with him. Meanwhile Feynman,
barely three months younger, was completing his sophomore year at MIT.
Schwinger published a fecund series of research papers, mostly in the
Physical Review, each highly polished, with a dozen different
collaborators. By the time Feynman published his undergraduate thesis,
Schwinger was in Berkeley as a National Research Council fellow, working
directly with Oppenheimer.

With Rabi, he chose to avoid Los Alamos in favor of radar and the
Radiation Laboratory. He never seemed to lose a stride. By the war’s end
Rabi had him replace Pauli as a special lecturer in charge of bringing the
laboratory’s scientists up to date with nonwar physics. For the atomic
bomb scientists, isolated as they were behind their desert fence, the war
brought a more total interruption of normal careers. Physicists Feynman’s
age were especially aware of it. They had just reached what should have
been their crucial, productive years. Schwinger made one tour through Los
Alamos in 1945 and met Feynman briefly for the first time. Feynman
marveled at how much this contemporary had managed to publish. He had
thought Schwinger was older. When he had long since forgotten the
content of Schwinger’s lecture to the Los Alamos theorists, he still
remembered the style: the way Schwinger walked into the room, his head
tilted, like a bull into the ring; the way he conspicuously set his notebook
aside; the intimidating perfection of his discourse.

Now Schwinger was at Harvard, where he was shortly to become a
twenty-nine-year-old full professor. The Harvard committee had seriously
considered only Bethe for the same opening and worried meanwhile
whether Schwinger would be able to wake up to teach classes that met as
early as noon. He managed, and his lectures on nuclear physics quickly

became a draw for the entire Harvard and MIT physics community.

Feynman, meanwhile, poured energy into his more mundane course in
the methods of mathematical physics. This was a standard course, taught
in every physics department, though it occurred to Feynman that he had
just lived through a momentous change in physicists’ mathematical
methods. At Los Alamos mathematical methods had been put through a
crucible: refined, clarified, rewritten, reinvented. Feynman thought he knew
what was useful and what was mere textbook knowledge taught because it
had always been taught. He intended to emphasize nonlinearity more than
was customary and to teach students the patchwork of gimmicks and tricks
that he used himself to solve equations. Beginning with his jottings on the
night train that brought him to Ithaca, he designed a new course from the
bottom up.

On the first page of a cardboard notebook like the ones he had used in

high school he began with first principles:

Phenomena complex—laws simple— connection is math-phys—

the solution of equ obtained from laws.

He was thinking about how to mold students in his own image. How did he
solve problems?

Know what to leave out… . physical insight knowing what can be

done by math.

He decided to give the students a blunt summary of what did and did not
lie ahead.

Lots of tricks to introduce—no time for complete study or math

rigor demonstration. Lots of work.

He crossed that out.

Really introduce each subject.

But after all it would be lots of work.

Lots of work—practice. Interested in more detail, read books, see
me, practice more examples. If no go—OK we slow up. Hand in some
problems so I can tell.

He would promise them important mathematical methods left out of
ordinary courses, as well as methods that were altogether new. It would be
practical, not perfect, mathematics.

Specify accuracy required. Let’s go

He scanted some of the laborious traditional techniques, such as
contour integration, because he had so often found—winning bets in the
process—that he could handle most such integrals directly by frontal
assault. Whether he would succeed in conveying such skills to his students
was a question that worried some of his colleagues as they watched
Feynman plow apart the mathematical-methods syllabus. Nevertheless,
during the few years that he taught the course, it drew some of the younger
members of the physics and mathematics faculty along with the captive
graduate students. The coolest among them had to feel the jolt of an
examination problem that began, “In an atom bomb in the form of a cylinder
radius a, height 2π, the density of neutrons n …” The students found
themselves in the grip of a theorist whose obsession with mathematical
methods concerned the uneasy first principles of quantum mechanics.
Again and again he showed his affinity with the purest core issues of the
propagation of sound and light. He drove his students through calculations
of the total intensity of radiation in all directions when emitted by a periodic
source; through the reluctant visualization of vectors, matrices, and tensors;
through the summations of infinite series that sometimes converged and
sometimes failed to converge, running inconveniently off toward infinity.

Gradually he settled in at Cornell, though he still made no progress on
his theoretical research. The atomic bomb was on his mind, and he went
on the local radio to speak about it in unadorned language. Announcer:
Last week Dr. Feynman told you what one atom bomb did to Hiroshima,
and what one bomb would do to Ithaca … The interviewer asked about
atomic-powered automobiles. Many listeners, he said, were awaiting the
day when they could slip a spoonful of uranium into the tank and thumb
their noses at the filling stations. Feynman said he doubted the practicality

of that—“the rays emitted by the fission of the uranium in the engine would
kill the driver.” Still, he had spent time working out other applications of
nuclear power. At Los Alamos he had invented a type of fast reactor for
generating electric power and had patented it (in the government’s behalf).
He was also thinking about space travel. “Dear Sir,” he wrote to a physicist
colleague as 1945 came to a close, “I believe that interplanetary travel is
now (with the release of atomic energy) a definite possibility.” He had a
radically quirky, almost flaky, proposal. Rocket propulsion would not be the
answer, he said. It was fundamentally limited by the temperature and
atomic weight of the propulsive gas, the temperature in turn being limited
by the ability of metal to withstand heat. He predicted—anticipating the
ungainly disposable boosters and giant fuel tanks that became the curse of
space travel thirty years in the future—that the weight and bulk of fuel would
exceed by too many times the weight and bulk of the vehicle.

Instead he proposed a form of jet propulsion, using air as the propellant.
Jet technology had just now reached practicality in airplanes. Feynman’s
spacecraft would use the outer edges of the earth’s atmosphere as a sort
of warm-up track and accelerate as it circled the earth. An atomic reactor
would power the jet by heating the air that was sucked into the engine.
Wings would be used first to provide lift and then, when the speed rose
beyond five miles per second, “flying upside down to keep you from going
off the earth, or rather out of the atmosphere.” When the craft reached a
useful escape velocity, it would fly off at a tangent toward its destination
like a rock from a slingshot.

Yes, air resistance, heating the ship, would be a problem. But Feynman
thought this could be overcome by delicately adjusting the altitude as the
craft sped up—“if there is enough air to cause appreciable heating by
friction there surely is enough to feed the jet engines.” The engines would
need impressive engineering to operate in such a wide range of air
densities, he admitted. He did not address a problem of symmetry: how
such a spacecraft would slow down on reaching an airless destination
such as the moon. In any event he could not have anticipated the killing flaw
in his idea: that people would lose faith in the innocence of nuclear
reactors flying about overhead.

They All Seem Ashes

He visited Far Rockaway just before the fall semester began in 1946 and
gave another talk on the atomic bomb at the local Temple Israel the day
after Yom Kippur. The synagogue had a glamorous new rabbi, Judah
Cahn, who delivered widely admired sermons on modern problems.
Feynman’s parents, despite their atheism, had started attending from time
to time. Melville’s health seemed slightly better. His uncontrollable high
blood pressure had become a constant source of worry to the family, and
in the preceding spring he had traveled out to the Mayo Clinic, in
Minnesota, where he was enrolled in an early experiment on the effect of
diet. He accepted a strict regimen of rice and fruit. It seemed to work. His
blood pressure decreased. He returned home and occasionally sneaked
out, in violation of doctors’ orders, to play golf with friends. He was fifty-six
years old. One day Feynman saw him at the table, staring at a salt shaker.
Melville closed one eye, opened it, closed the other eye, and said he had a
blind spot. A small blood vessel must have burst in his brain, he said.

The knowledge that sudden death might come at any time hung over the
family. Melville and his son almost never wrote each other—Lucille handled
the intrafamily correspondence—but when Richard first accepted the
Cornell professorship he sent his father a letter expressing twenty-five
years of love and gratitude, and Melville, moved, responded in kind. His
chest was swelled with pride, he wrote (while Lucille complained that he
was wasting paper by writing on only one side):

It is not so easy for a Dope of a father to write to a son who has
already arrived to a state of learning and wisdom beyond his… . That
was all right when you were small and I had a great advantage over
you—but today it would be more equitable if I could bask in the
sunlight of your knowledge, and sit by your side and learn from you
some of the more wondrous secrets of nature that now are beyond my
ken but are known to you.

On October 7 he collapsed from a stroke. He died the next day. Richard
signed his second death certificate in two years. Melville Feynman had
written him: “The dreams I have often had in my youth for my own

development, I see coming true in your career… . I envy the life of culture
you will have being constantly with so many other big men of equal culture.”
The interment took place at Bayside Cemetery nearby in Queens, a vast
rolling field of gravestones and monuments as far as the eye could see.
Lucille’s father had built a mausoleum there, a stone hut like a small bomb
shelter. Midway through the ceremony Rabbi Cahn asked Richard, as
eldest son, to say the Kaddish with him. Joan watched in anguish as her
brother’s face froze. He wanted no part of a mourners’ prayer in praise of
God.

He told the rabbi he did not understand the Hebrew. Cahn merely
switched to English. Richard listened to the words and refused to repeat
them. He did not believe in God; he knew that his father had not believed in
God; and the hypocrisy seemed unbearable. His disbelief had nothing of
indifference in it. It was a determined, coolly rational disbelief, a conviction
that the myths of religion cheated knowledge. He stood there surrounded
by stone and grass near the undersized sepulchral vaults, assembled one
atop another, that held the bones of his grandparents. One shelf, too, held
the remains of his infant brother, Henry, memorialized now for twenty-two
years after his life of one month. On Feynman’s face was a look of tension
and determination and also, it seemed to Joan at that moment, utter
isolation. Leaving his father’s coffin, he exploded in a rage. Their mother
broke down and wept.

At Cornell the next week he seemed unchanged. Just as at Los Alamos
—it had been barely a year before—if he grieved, he showed no one. He
was proudly rational as ever—“realistic,” he told himself. Classes began.
Cornell’s 1946 fall-term enrollment was its largest ever, nearly double
prewar levels. Feynman was already a draw for young physicists, and he
lectured with absolute confidence. Then, a few nights into the term—it was
October 17—he took a pen and paper, let realism slip away, and wrote
one last letter to the only person who could help him now:

D’Arline,
I adore you, sweetheart.
I know how much you like to hear that—but I don’t only write it
because you like it—I write it because it makes me warm all over
inside to write it to you.

It is such a terribly long time since I last wrote to you—almost two
years but I know you’ll excuse me because you understand how I am,
stubborn and realistic; & I thought there was no sense to writing.

But now I know my darling wife that it is right to do what I have
delayed in doing, and that I have done so much in the past. I want to
tell you I love you. I want to love you. I always will love you.

I find it hard to understand in my mind what it means to love you
after you are dead—but I still want to comfort and take care of you—
and I want you to love me and care for me. I want to have problems to
discuss with you—I want to do little projects with you. I never thought
until just now that we can do that together. What should we do. We
started to learn to make clothes together—or learn Chinese—or
getting a movie projector. Can’t I do something now. No. I am alone
without you and you were the “idea-woman” and general instigator of
all our wild adventures.

When you were sick you worried because you could not give me
something that you wanted to & thought I needed. You needn’t have
worried. Just as I told you then there was no real need because I loved
you in so many ways so much. And now it is clearly even more true—
you can give me nothing now yet I love you so that you stand in my way
of loving anyone else—but I want you to stand there. You, dead, are so
much better than anyone else alive.

I know you will assure me that I am foolish & that you want me to
have full happiness & don’t want to be in my way. I’ll bet you are
suprised that I don’t even have a girl friend (except you, sweetheart)
after two years. But you can’t help it, darling, nor can I—I don’t
understand it, for I have met many girls & very nice ones and I don’t
want to remain alone—but in two or three meetings they all seem
ashes. You only are left to me. You are real.

My darling wife, I do adore you.
I love my wife. My wife is dead.
Rich.
PS. Please excuse my not mailing this—but I don’t know your new

address.

That he had written such a letter to the woman he loved, two years after

her death, could never become part of the iconography of Feynman, the
collection of stories and images that was already beginning to follow him
about. The letter went into an envelope, the envelope into a box. It was not
read again until after his death. Nor did Feynman speak of his graveside
outburst at the burial of his father, even to friends, although they would have
recognized at least one of its potential morals, his unwillingness to submit
to hypocrisy. The Feynman who could be wracked by strong emotion, the
man stung by shyness, insecurity, anger, worry, or grief—no one got close
enough any more to see him. His friends heard a certain kind of story
instead, in which Feynman was an inadvertent boy hero, mastering a
bureaucracy or a person or a situation by virtue of his naïveté, his good
humor, his brashness, his commonsense cleverness (not brilliance), and
his emperor’s-new-clothes honesty. The stories were true, at least in spirit,
though like all stories they were selectively incomplete. They were
admired, polished, retold, and once in a while even relived.

Many of his friends at Los Alamos had already heard variations of a
draft-examination story, in which he needled an army examiner who asked
him to hold out his hands. Feynman held them out: one palm up, the other
palm down. The examiner asked him to turn them over, and he did,
providing a wise-guy lesson in symmetry: one palm down, the other palm
up. Shortly after his first year at Cornell, Feynman got a chance to refine
the story. The army was still drafting, and his educational deferments had
run their course. The Selective Service scheduled a new physical
examination. Feynman’s version of the story, told countless times in the
decades that followed, varied from the half serious to the strictly comic.
The basic form went like this:

Stripped to his underwear, he goes from booth to booth, until—“Finally,

we get to Booth No. 13, Psychiatrist.”

Witch doctor. Baloney. Faker. Feynman held an extreme view of
psychiatry. His mind was his bailiwick, and he liked to think himself in
control. Sensitive psychiatrists might have noted his tendency to deny the
occasional roiling undercurrents; the undercurrents and the denial were
their bailiwick. He preferred to stress the unscientific hocus-pocus of their
enterprise 
reproducible
experiments), as reflected in a movie he had seen recently, Alfred
Hitchcock’s Spellbound, in which “a woman” (Ingrid Bergman), “her hand

(conveniently shifting 

terminology, 

lack of 

is stuck and she can’t play the piano … she used to be a great pianist… .”
Certainly he never considered whether he (himself at that moment unable
to work) might have had any but the most rational of reasons for feeling:
“It’s boring as hell… .” The woman ducks off-screen with her psychiatrist,
comes back, sits down at the piano, and plays. “Well, this kind of baloney,
you know, I can’t stand it. I’m very anti. Okay?” Apart from everything else,
psychiatrists are doctors, and Feynman has his reasons for holding
doctors in contempt.

The psychiatrist looks at his file and says with a smile, Hello, Dick!
Where do you work? (“Well, what the hell is he calling me Dick for? You
know, he don’t know me that well.”)

Feynman says coldly, Schenectady. (This is temporarily true. He and
Bethe are supplementing their Cornell salaries by working that summer at
General Electric.)

Where at Schenectady, Dick?
Feynman tells him.
You like your work, Dick? “I couldn’t like him less, you know? Like a guy

bothering you in a bar.”

Now a fourth question—Do you think people talk about you?—and
Feynman detects that this is the routine: three innocent questions and then
down to business.

“So I say, Yeah …” At this point Feynman, relating the story, takes on a
tone of misunderstood innocence. He is scrupulously honest. If only the
psychiatrist would forget the formulas, forget the mumbo jumbo, and try to
understand him. “I wasn’t trying to fake it… . I meant in the sense that my
mother talks to her friends… . I tried to explain—honest… .” The
psychiatrist makes a note.

Do you think people stare at you? Feynman would say no—honest—but
the psychiatrist adds, For example, do you think that any of the fellows
sitting on the benches are looking at us now. Well, Feynman has sat on
one of those benches, and there was not much else to look at. He does
some mental arithmetic. “So I figure … there are about twelve guys in the
thing and about three of them are looking—well, that’s all they’ve got to do
—so I say, to be conservative, ‘Yeah, maybe two of them are looking at
us.’”

He turns around to check, and sure enough. But the psychiatrist, “this

nincompoop, this nincompoop … doesn’t bother to turn around and find out
if it’s true or not.” (No scientist he.)

Do you talk to yourself? “I admitted that I do… .” (“Incidentally, I didn’t tell
him something which I can tell you, which is I find myself sometimes talking
to myself in quite an elaborate fashion … : ‘The integral will be larger than
this sum of the terms, so that would make the pressure higher, you see?’
‘No, you’re crazy.’ ‘No, I’m not! No, I’m not!’ I say. I argue with myself… I
have two voices that work back and forth.”)

I see you lost a wife recently. Do you talk to her? (The resentment that

this question must stir goes beyond the comic bounds of the anecdote.)

Do you hear voices in your head? “No,” Feynman says. “Very rarely.”
He admits a few occasions. Sometimes, in fact, just as he was falling
asleep, he would hear Edward Teller, with a distinctive Hungarian accent,
in Chicago giving him his first briefing on the atomic bomb.

There was much more: an argument about the nature of insanity, an
argument about the value of life—Feynman in both cases continuing to get
under the examiner’s skin. Feynman acknowledged that one of his
mother’s sisters was mentally ill. And then the punch line, more serious
than Feynman’s audiences tended to realize.

Well, Dick, I see you have a Ph.D. Where did you study?
MIT and Princeton. Where did you study?
Yale and London. And what did you study, Dick?
Physics. And what did you study?
Medicine.
And this is medicine?
The story never included several plausible points. Feynman never
pleaded that, having contributed three years of wartime service in the
Manhattan Project, he ought to be exempt from a further contribution. Nor
did he mention how destructive it would have been to his career as a
theoretical physicist if he had been conscripted now, at the age of twentyeight. He had to walk a narrow line. There was nothing amusing or stylish in
the summer of 1946 about evading the draft. For most people, to be
declared mentally deficient by one’s draft board was a more frightening
possibility than army service—far more damaging to one’s civilian
prospects. So the Selective Service established few safeguards against

fakery in the psychiatric examination. It did not expect to see records of a
previous history of mental illness, for example; in any case private
psychiatric treatment was far more unusual than it became in the next
generation. Examiners felt they could rely on a subject’s naïve selfdescription to answer their checklist questions. Feynman repeated his
answers to a second psychiatrist. His ability to conjure the voice of Teller
was recorded as hypnagogic hallucinations. It was noted that the subject
had a peculiar stare. (“I think it was probably when I said, ‘And this is
medicine?’”) He was rejected.

It occurred to him that the Selective Service would examine its own files
and discover a series of official letters requesting deferment so that
Feynman could conduct essential research in physics during the war. More
recent letters stated that he was performing an important service educating
future physicists at Cornell. Might someone conclude that he was
deliberately trying to deceive the examiners? To protect himself, he wrote
a letter, carefully phrased, stating for the record that he believed no weight
should be given to the finding of psychiatric deficiency. The Selective
Service replied with a new draft card: 4-F.

Around a Mental Block

Princeton was celebrating the bicentennial of its founding with a grand
explosion of pomp that fall: parties, processions, and a series of formal
conferences that drew scholars and dignitaries from long distances. Dirac
had agreed to speak on elementary particles as part of a three-day
session on the future of nuclear science. Feynman was invited to introduce
his one-time hero and lead a discussion afterward.

He disliked Dirac’s paper, a restatement of the now-familiar difficulties
with quantum electrodynamics. It struck him as backward-looking in its
Hamiltonian energy-centered emphasis—a dead end. He made so many
nervous jokes that Niels Bohr, who was due to speak later in the day, stood
up and criticized him for his lack of seriousness. Feynman made a heartfelt
remark about the unsettled state of the theory. “We need an intuitive leap at
the mathematical formalism, such as we had in the Dirac electron theory,”
he said. “We need a stroke of genius.”

As the day wore on—Robert Wilson speaking about the high-energy
scattering of protons, E. O. Lawrence lecturing on his California
accelerators—Feynman looked out the window and saw Dirac lolling on a
patch of grass and gazing at the sky. He had a question that he had
wanted to ask Dirac since before the war. He wandered out and sat down.
A remark in a 1933 paper of Dirac’s had given Feynman a crucial clue
toward his discovery of a quantum-mechanical version of the action in
classical mechanics. “It is now easy to see what the quantum analogue of
all this must be,” Dirac had written, but neither he nor anyone else had
pursued this clue until Feynman discovered that the “analogue” was, in fact,
exactly proportional. There was a rigorous and potentially useful
mathematical bond. Now he asked Dirac whether the great man had
known all along that the two quantities were proportional.

“Are they?” Dirac said. Feynman said yes, they were. After a silence he

walked away.

twenty-eight-year-old 

Feynman’s reputation was traveling around the university circuit. Job
offers floated his way. They seemed perversely inappropriate and did
nothing to help his mood of frustration. Oppenheimer had invited him to
California for the spring semester; now he turned the invitation down.
Cornell promoted him to associate professor and raised his salary again.
The chairman of the University of Pennsylvania’s physics department
needed a new chief theorist. Here Bethe stepped in paternalistically: he
had no intention of letting go of Feynman, and he was sensitive to his
protégé’s mood. He thought it would be harmful for this suddenly
the psychological
unproductive 
responsibility of a lead role in a university theory group. More than
anything, he thought Feynman needed shelter. (He told the Pennsylvania
administrator that Feynman was the second-best young physicist around:
second to Schwinger.) For Feynman the most surprising—and oppressive
—offer came from the Institute for Advanced Study, Einstein’s institute in
Princeton, in the spring. Oppenheimer had now been named as the
institute’s director, and he wanted Feynman. H. D. Smyth, Feynman’s old
chairman at Princeton, wanted him, too, and the two institutions had
sounded him out about a special joint appointment. His anxiety about
failing to live up to such expectations was reaching a peak. He
experimented with various tactics to break his mental block. For a while he

take on 

to 

got up every morning at 8:30 and tried to work. Looking in the mirror one
morning as he shaved, he told himself the Princeton offer was absurd—he
could not possibly accept, and furthermore he could not accept the
responsibility for their impression of him. He had never claimed to be an
Einstein, he told himself. It was their mistake. For a moment he felt lighter.
Some of his guilt seemed to lift away.

His old friend Wilson had just arrived to direct the nuclear laboratory.
Along with Bethe, he caught Feynman’s mood and invited him in for a talk.
Don’t worry so much, he told Feynman. We are responsible. We hire
professors; we take the risks; as long as they teach their classes
satisfactorily they fulfill their part of the bargain. It made Feynman think
wistfully about the days before the future of science had begun to seem
like his mission—the days before physicists changed the universe and
became the most potent political force within American science, before
institutions with fast-expanding budgets began chasing nuclear physicists
like Hollywood stars. He remembered when physics had been a game,
when he could look at the graceful narrowing curve in three dimensions that
water makes as it streams from a tap, and he could take the time to
understand why.

A few days later he was eating in the student cafeteria when someone
tossed a dinner plate into the air—a Cornell cafeteria plate with the
university seal imprinted on one rim—and in the instant of its flight he
experienced what he long afterward considered an epiphany. As the plate
spun, it wobbled. Because of the insignia he could see that the spin and
the wobble were not quite in synchrony. Yet just in that instant it seemed to
him—or was it his physicist’s intuition?—that the two rotations were
related. He had told himself he was going to play, so he tried to work the
problem out on paper. It was surprisingly complicated, but he used a
Lagrangian, least-action approach and found a two-to-one ratio in the
relationship of wobble and spin. That was satisfyingly neat. Still, he wanted
to understand the Newtonian forces directly, just as he had when he was a
sophomore taking his first theory course and he provocatively refused to
use the Lagrangian approach. He showed Bethe what he had discovered.

But what’s the importance of that? Bethe asked.
It doesn’t have any importance, he said. I don’t care whether a thing has

importance. Isn’t it fun?

It’s fun, Bethe agreed. Feynman told him that was all he was going to do

from now on—have fun.

Sustaining that mood took deliberate effort, for in truth he had given up
none of his ambition. If he was floundering, so were far more distinguished
theoretical physicists, committed to resolving the flaws in quantum
mechanics. He had not forgotten his painful disagreement with Dirac that
fall—his conviction that Dirac had turned squarely back toward the past
and that an alternative approach must surely be possible. Early in 1947
Feynman let his friend Welton know how grand his plans had become.
(Welton was now working at the permanent plant at Oak Ridge; many
years later he would finish his career there, still affected by the peculiar
disappointment that hobbled so many others who had crossed Feynman’s
path at the wrong time.) Feynman said nothing about having fun. “I am
engaged now in a general program of study—I want to understand (not just
in a mathematical way) the ideas of all branches of theor. physics,” he
wrote. “As you know I am now struggling with the Dirac Equ.” Despite what
he told Bethe, he did make a connection between the axial wobble of a
cafeteria plate and the abstract quantum-mechanical notion of spin that
Dirac had so successfully incorporated in his electron.

Many years later Feynman and Dirac met one more time. They
exchanged a few awkward words—a conversation so remarkable that a
physicist within earshot immediately jotted down the Pinteresque dialogue
he thought he heard drifting his way:

I am Feynman.
I am Dirac. (Silence.) It must be wonderful to be the discoverer of

that equation.

That was a long time ago. (Pause.) What are you working on?

Mesons.

Are you trying to discover an equation for them? It is very hard.
One must try.

More than anyone else, Dirac had made the mere discovery of an equation
into a thing to be admired. To aficionados the Dirac equation never did
quite lose its rabbit-out-of-a-hat quality. It was relativistic—it survived
without strain the manipulations required to accommodate near-light

it made spin a natural property of 

velocities. And 
the electron.
Understanding spin meant understanding the deceptive unreality of some
of physics’ new language. Spin was not yet as whimsical and abstract as
some of the particle properties that followed it, properties called color and
flavor in a half-witty, half-despairing acknowledgment of their unreality. It
was still possible, barely, to understand spin literally: to view the electron
as a little moon. But if the electron was also an infinitesimal point, it could
hardly rotate in the classical fashion. And if the electron was also a smear
of probabilities and a wave reverberating in a constraining chamber, how
could these objects be said to spin? What sort of spin could come only in
unit amounts or half-unit amounts (as quantum-mechanical spin did)?
Physicists learned to think of spin not so much as a kind of rotation, but as
a kind of symmetry, a way of stating mathematically that a system could
undergo a certain rotation.

Spin was a problem for Feynman’s theory as he had left it in his
Princeton thesis. The quantity of action in ordinary mechanics contained no
such property. And his theory would be useless if he could not apply it to a
spinning, relativistic electron—the Dirac electron. Among the obstacles
blocking his path, this was one of the heaviest. No wonder his eye might
have been drawn to things that spun—a cafeteria plate, for example,
wobbling in a split-second trajectory. His next step was peculiar and
characteristic. He reduced the problem to a skeleton, a universe with just
one dimension (or two: one space and one time). This universe was
merely a line, and in it a particle could take just one kind of path, back and
forth, reversing direction like a crazed insect. Feynman’s goal was to begin
with the method he had invented at Princeton—the summing of all possible
paths a particle could take—and see whether he could derive, in this onedimensional world, a one-dimensional Dirac equation. He jotted:

Feynman considered the path a particle would take in a one-dimensional
universethat is, a particle restricted to moving back and forth on a line , always at the
speed of light. He diagrammed the back-and-forth motion by visualizing the space
dimension horizontally and the time dimension vertically: the passage of time is
represented as motion upward on the page. In this toy model, he found that he could
derive a central equation of quantum mechanics by adding the contributions made by all
the possible paths a particle could take.

Geometry of Dirac Equ. 1 dimension
Prob = squ. of sum of contrib. each path
Paths zig zag at light velocity.

And he added something new—a diagram, purely schematic, for keeping
track of the zigs and zags. The horizontal dimension represented his one
spatial dimension, and the vertical dimension represented time. He
successfully negotiated the details of this one-dimensional shadow theory.
The spin of his particles implied a phase, like the phase of a wave, and he
made some assumptions, only partly arbitrary, about what would happen to
the phase each time a particle zagged. Phase was crucial to the
mathematics of summing the paths, because paths would either cancel or
reinforce one another, depending on how their phases overlapped.
Feynman did not attempt to publish this fragment of a theory, excited
though he was by the progress. The challenge was to extend the theory to
more dimensions—to let the space unfold—and this he could not do,
though he spent long hours in the library, for once reading old
mathematics.

Shrinking the Infinities

Feynman’s frustration in these first postwar years mirrored a growing
sense of impotence and defeat among established theoretical physicists.
The feeling, at first private and then shared, remained invisible outside
their small community. The contrast with the physicists’ public glory could
hardly have been greater.

The cause was abstruse. The single difficulty at the core of this anguish
was a mathematical tendency of certain quantities to diverge as
successive terms of an equation were computed—terms that should have
been vanishing in importance. Physically it seemed that the closer one
stood to an electron, the greater its charge and mass would appear. The
result: the infinities with which Feynman had been struggling since
Princeton. 
first
approximations followed by a Sisyphean nightmare. The harder a physicist
pushed, the less accurate his calculations became. Such quantities as the

that quantum mechanics produced good 

It meant 

mass of the electron became—if the theory were taken to its limit—infinite.
The horror of this was hard to comprehend, and no glimmer of it appeared
in popular accounts of science at the time. Yet it was not merely a
theoretical knot. A pragmatic physicist eventually had to face it. “Thinking I
understand geometry,” Feynman said later, “and wanting to fit the diagonal
of a five foot square, I try to figure out how long it must be. Not being very
expert I get infinity—useless… .”

It is not philosophy we are after, but the behavior of real things. So
in despair, I measure it directly—lo, it is near to seven feet—neither
infinity nor zero. So, we have measured these things for which our
theory gives such absurd answers… .

Experimental yardsticks for the electron were not so easy to come by, and
it was a tribute to the original theory of Heisenberg, Schrödinger, and
Dirac that first approximations matched any experimental results that the
laboratories had produced so far. Better results were on the way, however.
Meanwhile, the scientists contemplating the state of theoretical physics
descended into a distinct gloominess; in the aftermath of the bomb, their
mood seemed postcoital.

“The last eighteen years”—the period, that is, since the quick birth of
quantum mechanics—“have been the most sterile of the century,”
remarked I. I. Rabi to a colleague over lunch in that spring of 1947, though
Rabi himself was thriving as head of a fruitful group at Columbia.

“Theoreticians were in disgrace”—so it seemed to one especially

precocious student of physics, Murray Gell-Mann.

“The theory of elementary particles has reached an impasse,” Victor
Weisskopf wrote. Everyone had been struggling futilely, he said, especially
since the war, and everyone had had enough of “knocking a sore head
against the same old wall.”

Merely a few dozen men in mathematical difficulty—or the generation’s
deepest crisis in theoretical physics. It was all the same. Weisskopf was
preparing for an unusual gathering. A former president of the New York
Academy of Sciences, Duncan MacInnes, had been nursing a conviction
that modern-day conferences were growing too unwieldy. Hundreds of
people would appear. Speakers were starting to cater to these diffuse

audiences by delivering generalized and retrospective talks. As an
experiment, MacInnes proposed an intimate meeting restricted to twenty or
thirty invited guests, to take place in a relaxed, country-inn setting. With
“Fundamental Problems of Quantum Mechanics” as a topic, he managed
—though it took more than a year—to draw a select group in early June to
an inn called the Ram’s Head, just opening for the summer season on New
York’s Shelter Island, between the forks of eastern Long Island. Weisskopf
was one of those charged with setting the agenda. Other participants were
Oppenheimer, Bethe, Wheeler, Rabi, Teller, and several representatives of
the younger generation, including Julian Schwinger and Richard Feynman.
So two dozen suit-jacketed physicists met on a Sunday afternoon on the
East Side of New York and motored across Long Island in a rickety bus.
Somewhere along the way a police escort picked them up, sirens wailing,
and a banquet was arranged by a local chamber of commerce official who
had been serving in the Pacific when, he felt, the atomic bomb saved his
life. A ferry carried them across to Shelter Island, and to some of the
physicists there was an air of unreality about it all. When they gathered for
breakfast the next morning, they noticed the phrase “restricted clientele” on
the menus and performed a quick head count: their group contained more
Jews, they decided, than the inn’s dining room had ever seen. One New
York newspaper reporter had come along, and he telephoned his report to
the Herald Tribune: “It is doubtful if there has ever been a conference quite
like this one… . They roam through the corridors mumbling mathematical
equations, eat their meals amid the fury of technical discussions… .” Island
residents, he wrote,

are reasonably confused about this sudden descent of science
among them. The principal theory is that the scientists are busy
making another type of atomic bomb, and nothing could be farther
from the truth… .

Quantum mechanics is the never-never land of science, a world in
which matter and energy become confused and where all the verities
of day-to-day life become meaningless… .

To those sensitive to small breezes, it was beginning to seem that two of
the younger men in particular, Schwinger and Feynman, were engaged in
a gestation of fresh ideas. Schwinger mostly kept his own counsel during

these three days. Feynman tried his methods out on a few people; a young
Dutch physicist, Abraham Pais, watched him derive results at lightning
speed with the help of sketchy pictures that left Pais baffled. On the last
morning, after some words by Oppenheimer, Feynman was asked to give
the whole group an informal description of his work, and he did, happily.
No one really understood, but he left the memory of—as one listener
recorded in his diary—“a clear voice, great rush of words and illustrative
gestures sometimes ebullient.”

Above all, however, it was a conference dominated by news from
experimenters, and particularly experimenters in the furnace Rabi was
stoking at Columbia. The Columbia groups favored techniques that
seemed homely and unspectacular in this era of the burgeoning particle
accelerator, though their arsenal also included technologies fresh from the
wartime Radiation Laboratory, magnetrons and microwaves. Willis Lamb
had just shined a beam of microwaves onto a hot wisp of hydrogen
blowing from an oven. He was trying to measure the precise energy levels
of electrons in the hydrogen atom. He succeeded—the art of spectroscopy
had never seen such precision—and he found a distinct gap between two
energy levels that should have been identical. Should have been, that is,
according to the clearest existing guide to hydrogen atoms and electrons,
the theory of Dirac. That was in April. Lamb had gone to bed thinking about
knobs and magnets and a bouncing spot of light from the galvanometer
and the clear discrepancy between his experiment and Dirac’s theory, and
he had awakened the next day thinking (accurately, as it turned out): Nobel
Prize. News of what would soon be called the Lamb shift had already
reached most of the Shelter Island participants before Lamb made a
detailed report the first day. The theorists present had often repeated the
truism that progress in science comes when experiments contradict theory.
Rarely had any of them seen such a clean example (more often it was
theory that contradicted theory). To Schwinger, listening, the point was that
the problem with quantum electrodynamics was neither infinite nor zero: it
was a number, now standing before them, finite and small. The alumni of
Los Alamos and the Radiation Laboratory knew that the task of theoretical
physics was to justify such numbers. The rest of the conference fed off a
nervous euphoria, as it seemed to Schwinger: “The facts were incredible—
to be told that the sacred Dirac theory was breaking down all over the

place.” As the meeting adjourned, Schwinger left with Oppenheimer by
seaplane.

Quantum electrodynamics was a “debacle,” another physicist said.
Harsh assessments of a theory accurate enough for all but this delicate
experiment. But after all, the physicists had known that the theory was
fatally pocked with infinities. The experiment gave them real numbers to
calculate, numbers marking the exact not-quite-rightness of the world
according to Dirac.

Dyson

That 
fall Freeman Dyson arrived at Cornell. Some of Cornell’s
mathematicians knew the work of a Briton by that name. It was hardly a
common name, and mathematics was certainly known for its prodigies, but
surely, they thought, this small, hawk-nosed twenty-three-year-old joining
the physics department could not be the same man. Other graduate
students found him genial but inscrutable. He would sleep late, bring his
New York Times to the office, read it until lunch time, and spend the
afternoon with his feet up and perhaps his eyes closed. Just occasionally
he would wander into Bethe’s office. What they did there, no one knew.

Indeed, Dyson was one of England’s two or three most brilliant
mathematical prodigies. He was the son of two supremely cultured
members of the middle class who were late to marry and entering middle
age when he was born. His father, George, composed, conducted, and
taught music at a boys’ college in the south. Eventually he became director
of England’s Royal College of Music. His mother, Mildred, trained as a
lawyer, though she did not practice, and passed on to Freeman her deep
love of literature, beginning with Chaucer and the poets of ancient Greece
and Rome. As a six-year-old he would sit with encyclopedia volumes
spread open before him and make long, engrossing calculations on sheets
of paper. He was intensely self-possessed even then. His older sister once
interrupted him to ask where their nanny was and heard him reply, “I expect
her to be in the absolute elsewhere.” He read a popular astronomy book,
The Splendour of the Heavens, and the science fiction of Jules Verne,
and when he was eight and nine wrote a science-fiction novel of his own,

Sir Phillip Roberts’s Erolunar Collision, with a maturely cadenced syntax
and an adult sense of literary flow. His scientist hero has a knack for both
arithmetic and spaceship design. Freeman, who did not favor short
sentences, imagined a scientist comfortable with public acclaim, yet
solitary in his work:

“I, Sir Phillip Roberts, and my friend, Major Forbes,” he began,
“have just unravelled an important secret of nature; that Eros, that
minor planet that is so well-known on account of its occasional
proximity with the Earth, Eros, will approach within 3,000,000 miles of
the Earth in 10 years 287 days hence, instead of the usual 13,000,000
miles every 37 years; and, therefore it may, by some great chance fall
upon the Earth. Therefore I advise you to calculate the details of this
happening!” …

When the cheers were over, and everybody had gone home, it did
not mean that the excitement was over; no, not at all; everybody was
making the wildest calculations; some reasonable, some not; but Sir
Phillip only wrote coolly in his study rather more than usual; nobody
could tell what his thoughts were.

He read popular books about Einstein and relativity and, realizing that
he needed to learn a more advanced mathematics than his school taught,
sent away to scientific publishers for their catalogs. His mother finally felt
that his interest in mathematics was turning into an obsession. He was
fifteen and had just spent a Christmas vacation working methodically, from
six each morning until ten each evening, through the seven hundred
problems of H. T. H. Piaggio’s Differential Equations. That same year,
frustrated at learning that a classic book on number theory by I. M.
Vinogradov existed only in Russian, he taught himself the language and
wrote out a full translation in his careful hand. As Christmas vacation
ended, his mother went for a walk with him and began a cautionary lecture
with the words of the Latin playwright Terence: “I am human and I let
nothing human be alien to me.” She continued by telling him Goethe’s
version of the Faust story, parts one and two, rendering Faust’s immersion
in his books, his lust for knowledge and power, his sacrifice of the
possibility of love, so powerfully that years later, when Dyson happened to

see the film Citizen Kane, he realized that he was weeping with the
recognition of his mother’s Faust incarnate once again on the screen.

to 

intimate 

the Royal Air Force bomber command 

As the war began, Dyson entered Trinity College, Cambridge. At
Cambridge he heard 
lectures by England’s greatest
mathematicians, Hardy, Littlewood, and Besicovitch. In physics Dirac
reigned. Dyson’s war could hardly have been more different from
Feynman’s. The British war organization wasted his talents prodigiously,
in a
assigning him 
Buckinghamshire forest, where he researched statistical studies that were
doomed, when they countered the official wisdom, to be ignored. The
futility of this work impressed him. He and others in the operational
research section learned—contrary to the essential bomber command
dogma—that the safety of bomber crews did not increase with experience;
that escape hatches were too narrow for airmen to use in emergencies;
that gun turrets slowed the aircraft and bloated the crew sizes without
increasing the chances of surviving enemy fighters; and that the entire
British strategic bombing campaign was a failure. Mathematics repeatedly
belied anecdotal experience, particularly when the anecdotal experience
was colored by a lore whose purpose was to keep young men flying.

Dyson saw the scattershot bomb patterns in postmission photographs,
saw the Germans’ ability to keep factories operating amid the rubble of
civilian neighborhoods, worked through the firestorms of Hamburg in 1943
and Dresden in 1945, and felt himself descending into a moral hell. At Los
Alamos a military bureaucracy worked more successfully than ever before
or since with independent-minded scientists. The military bureaucracy of
Dyson’s experience embodied a routine of petty and not-so-petty
dishonesty, and the scientists of the bomber command were unable to
challenge it.

These were black days for the combination of science and machinery
called technology. England, which had invented so much, had always been
prone to misgivings. Machines disrupted traditional ways of living. In the
workplace they seemed dehumanizing. At the turn of the century, amid the
black soot clouds of the English industrial city, it was harder to romanticize
the brutal new working conditions of the factory than the brutal old working
conditions of the peasant farm. America, too, had its Luddites, but in the
age of radio, telephone, and automobile few saw a malign influence in the

the 

that 

progress 
loathing of
technology brought. For Americans 
technology that would become a theme of late-twentieth-century life began
with fears born amid the triumph of 1945. Among the books that had most
influenced Dyson was a children’s tale called The Magic City, written in
1910 by Edith Nesbit. Among its lessons was a bittersweet one about
technology. Her hero—a boy named Philip—learns that in the magic city,
when one asks for a machine, he must keep using it forever. Given a
choice between a horse and a bicycle, Philip wisely chooses the horse, at
a time when few in England or America were failing to trade their horses
for bicycles, motorcars, or tractors. Dyson remembered The Magic City
when he learned about the atomic bomb—remembered that new
technology, once acquired, is always with us. But nothing is simple, and
Dyson also took to heart a remark of D. H. Lawrence’s about the welcome
minimal purity of books, chairs, bottles, and an iron bedstead, all made by
machines: “My wish for something to serve my purpose is perfectly
fulfilled… . Wherefore I do honour to the machine and to its inventor.” The
news of Hiroshima came partly as a relief to Dyson. It released him from
his own war. Yet he knew that the strategic bombing campaign had killed
four times as many civilians as the atomic bombs. Years later, when Dyson
had a young son, he woke the boy in the middle of the night because he—
Freeman—had awakened from an unbearable nightmare. A plane had
crashed to the ground in flames. People were nearby, and some ran into
the fire to rescue the victims. Dyson, in his dream, could not move.

He sometimes struck people as shy or diffident, but his teachers in
England had learned that he had enormous self-possession. As a highschool student he had worked on the problem of pure number theory
known as partitions—a number’s partitions being the ways it can be
subdivided into sums of whole numbers: the partitions of 4 are 1 + 1 + 1 +
1, 1 + 1 + 2, 1 + 3, 2 + 2, and 4. The number of partitions rises fairly rapidly
—14 has 135 partitions—and the question of just how rapidly has all the
hallmarks of classic number theory. It is easy to state. A child can work out
the first few cases. And from its contemplation arises a glorious world with
the intricacy and beauty of origami. Dyson followed a path trod earlier by
the Indian prodigy Srinivasa Ramanujan at the beginning of the century. By
his sophomore year at Cambridge he arrived at a set of conjectures about
partitions that he could not prove. Instead of setting them aside, he made a

virtue of his failure. He published them as only his second paper.
“Professor Littlewood,” he wrote of one of his famous professors, “when he
makes use of an algebraic identity, always saves himself the trouble of
proving it; he maintains that an identity, if true, can be verified in a few lines
by anybody obtuse enough to feel the need of verification. My object … is
to confute this assertion… .” Dyson promised to state a series of
interesting identities that he could not prove. He would also, he boasted,
“indulge in some even vaguer guesses concerning the existence of
identities which I am not only unable to prove but unable to state… .
Needless to say, I strongly recommend my readers to supply the missing
proofs, or, even better, the missing identities.” Routine mathematical
discourse was not for him.

One day an assistant of Dirac’s told Dyson, “I am leaving physics for
mathematics; I find physics messy, unrigorous, elusive.” Dyson replied, “I
am leaving mathematics for physics for exactly the same reasons.” He felt
that mathematics was an interesting game but not so interesting as the
real world. The United States seemed the only possible place to pursue
physics now. He had never heard of Cornell, but he was advised that Bethe
would be the best person in the world to work with, and Bethe was at
Cornell.

He went with the attitude of an explorer to a strange land, eager to
expose himself to the flora and fauna and the possibly dangerous
inhabitants. He played his first game of poker. He experienced the
American form of “picnic,” which surprisingly involved the frying of steak on
an open-air grill. He ventured forth on automobile excursions. “We go
through some wild country,” he wrote his parents shortly after his arrival—
the wild country in this case being the stretch of exurban New York lying
between Ithaca and Rochester. He traveled with a theoretician called
Richard Feynman: “the first example I have met of that rare species, the
native American scientist.”

He has developed a private version of the quantum theory … ; in
general he is always sizzling with new ideas, most of which are more
spectacular than helpful, and hardly any of which get very far before
some newer inspiration eclipses them… . when he bursts into the
room with his latest brain-wave and proceeds to expound it with the

most lavish sound effects and waving about of the arms, life at least is
not dull.

Although Dyson was nominally a mere graduate student, for his first
assignment Bethe had handed him a live problem: a version of the Lamb
shift, fresh from Shelter Island. Bethe himself had already made the first
fast break in the theoretical problem posed by Lamb’s experiment. On the
train ride home, using a scrap of paper, he made a fast, intuitive
calculation that soon made a dozen of his colleagues say, if only I had …
He telephoned Feynman when the train reached Schenectady, and he
made sure his preliminary draft was in the hands of Oppenheimer and the
other Shelter Island alumni within a week. It was a blunt Los Alamos–style
estimate, ignoring the effects of relativity and evading the infinities by
arbitrarily cutting them off. Bethe’s breakthrough was sure to be
superseded by a more rigorous treatment of the kind Schwinger was
known to have in the works. But it gave the right number, almost exactly,
and it lent weight to the conviction that a proper quantum electrodynamics
would account for the new, precise experiments.

The existing theory “explained” the existence of different energy levels in
the atom. It gave physicists their only workable means of calculating them.
The different energies arose from different combinations of crucial
quantum numbers, the angular momentum of the electron orbiting the
nucleus, and the angular momentum of the electron spinning around itself.
A certain symmetry built into the equation made it natural for a pair of the
resulting energy levels to coincide exactly. But they did not coincide in
Willis Lamb’s laboratory, so something must be missing and, as Bethe
surmised, that something was the theorists’ old bugbear, the selfinteraction of the electron.

This extra energy or mass was created by the snake-swallowing-its-tail
interplay of the electron with its own field. This quantity had been a
tolerable nuisance when it was theoretically infinite and experimentally
negligible. Now it was theoretically infinite and experimentally real. Bethe
had in mind a suggestion that the Dutch physicist Hendrik Kramers had
made at Shelter Island: that the “observed” mass of the electron, the mass
the theorists tended to think of as a fundamental quantity, should be
thought of as a combination of two other quantities, the self-energy and an

“intrinsic” mass. These masses, intrinsic and observed, also known as
“bare” and “dressed,” made an odd couple. The intrinsic mass could never
be measured directly, and the observed mass could not be computed from
first principles. Kramers proposed a method by which the theorists would
pluck a number from experimental measurements and correct it, or
“renormalize” it. This Bethe did, crudely but effectively. Meanwhile, as the
mass went, so went the charge—this formerly irreducible quantity, too, had
to be renormalized. Renormalization was a process of adjusting terms of
the equation to turn infinite quantities into finite ones. It was almost like
looking at a huge object through an adjustable lens, and turning a knob to
bring it down to size, all the while watching the effect of the knob turning on
other objects, one of which was the knob itself. It required great care.

From one perspective, renormalization amounted to subtracting infinities
from infinities, with a silent prayer. Ordinarily such an operation could be
meaningless: infinity (the number of integers, 0, 1, 2, 3, …) minus infinity
(the number of even integers, 0, 2, 4, …) equals infinity (the remaining,
odd integers, 1,3, 5, …), and all three of those infinities are the same,
unlike, for example, the distinctly greater infinity representing the number of
real numbers. The theorists implicitly hoped that when they wrote infinity –
infinity = zero nature would miraculously make it so, for once. That their
hope was granted said something important about the world. For a while it
was not clear just what.

Bethe assigned Dyson a stripped-down, toy version of the Lamb shift,
asking him to calculate the Lamb shift for an electron with no spin. It was a
way for Dyson to find a quick way into a problem of the most timely
importance and for Bethe to continue his own prodding. Dyson could see
that the calculation Bethe had published was both a swindle and a piece of
genius, a bad approximation that somehow coughed up the right answer.
More and more, too, Dyson talked with Feynman, who gradually began to
come into clearer focus for him. He watched this wild American dash from
the dinner table at the Bethes’ to play with their five-year-old son, Henry.
Feynman did have an extraordinary affinity for his friends’ children. He
would entertain them with gibberish, or with juggling tricks, or with what
sounded to Dyson like a one-man percussion band. He could enthrall them
merely by borrowing someone’s eyeglasses and slowly putting them on,
taking them off, and putting them on. Or he would engage them in

conversation. He once asked Henry Bethe, “Did you know there are twice
as many numbers as numbers?”
“No, there are not!” Henry said.
Feynman said he could prove it. “Name a number.”
“One million.”
Feynman said, “Two million.”
“Twenty-seven!”
Feynman said, “Fifty-four,” and kept on countering with the number that
was twice Henry’s, until suddenly Henry saw the point. It was his first real
encounter with infinity.

For a while, because Feynman did not seem to take his work seriously,
neither did Dyson. Dyson wrote his parents that Feynman was “half genius
and half buffoon” (a description he later regretted). Just a few days later
Dyson heard an account from Weisskopf, visiting Cornell, of Schwinger’s
progress at Harvard. He sensed a connection with the very different
notions he was hearing from Feynman. He had begun to see a method
beneath Feynman’s flash and wildness. The next time he wrote his parents,
he said:

Feynman is a man whose ideas are as difficult to make contact
with as Bethe’s are easy; for this reason I have so far learnt much
more from Bethe, but I think if I stayed here much longer I should begin
to find that it was Feynman with whom I was working more.

A Half-Assedly Thought-Out Pictorial Semi-

Vision Thing

formalisms. But another obstacle 

By the physicists’ own lights their difficulties were mathematical: infinities,
the
divergences, unruly 
background, rarely surfacing in the standard published or unpublished
rhetoric: the impossibility of visualization. How was one to perceive the
atom, or the electron in the act of emitting light? What mental picture could
guide the scientist? The first quantum paradoxes had so shattered
physicists’ classical intuitions that by the 1940s they rarely discussed

lay 

in 

visualization. It seemed a psychological issue, not a scientific one.

the 

forswore 

The atom of Niels Bohr, a miniature solar system, had become an
embarrassingly false image. In 1923, on the tenth anniversary of Bohr’s
conception, the German quantum physicist Max Born hailed it: “the thought
that the laws of the macrocosmos in the small reflect the terrestrial world
obviously exercises a great magic on mankind’s mind”—but already he
and his colleagues could see the picture fading into anachronism. It
survived in the language of angular momentum and spin—as well as in
the standard high-school physics and chemistry curriculums—but there
was no longer anything plausible in the picture of electrons orbiting a
nucleus. Instead there were waves with modes of resonance, particles that
smeared out probabilistically, operators and matrices, malleable spaces
with extra dimensions, and physicists who 
idea of
visualization altogether. Bohr himself had set the tone. In accepting the
Nobel Prize for his atomic model, he said it was time to give up the hope
of explanations in terms of analogies with everyday experience. “We are
therefore obliged to be modest in our demands and content ourselves with
concepts which are formal in the sense that they do not provide a visual
picture of the sort one is accustomed to require… .” This progress had not
been altogether free of tension. “The more I reflect on the physical portion
of Schrödinger’s theory, the more disgusting I find it,” was Heisenberg’s
1926 comment to Pauli. “Just imagine the rotating electron whose charge
is distributed over the entire space with axes in 4 or 5 dimensions. What
Schrödinger writes on the visualizability of his theory … I consider trash.”
As much as physicists valued the conceptualizing skill they called intuition,
as much as they spoke of a difference between physical understanding
and formal understanding, they had nevertheless learned to mistrust any
picture of subatomic reality that resembled everyday experience. No more
baseballs, artillery shells, or planetoids for the quantum theorists; no more
idle wheels or wavy waves. Feynman’s father had asked him, in the story
he told so many times: “I understand that when an atom makes a transition
from one state to another, it emits a particle of light called a photon… . Is
the photon in the atom ahead of time? … Well, where does it come from,
then? How does it come out?” No one had a mental image for this, the
radiation of light, the interaction of matter with the electromagnetic field: the
defining event of quantum electrodynamics.

Where this image should have been, instead there was a void, as frothy
and alive with possibility as the unquiet vacuum of the new physics. Unable
to let their minds fix on even a provisional picture of quantum events, some
physicists turned to a new kind of philosophizing, characterized by
thought experiments and arguments about reality,
paradoxical 
consciousness, causality, and measurement. Such arguments grew to
form an indispensable part of the late twentieth century’s intellectual
atmosphere; they trailed the rest of physics as a cloud of smoke and
flotsam trails a convoy. They were provocative and irresolvable. The paper
of Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen in 1935—the paper that provided the
seventeen-year-old Schwinger with his first opportunity to impress Rabi—
became an enduring example. It posed the case of two quantum systems
—atoms, perhaps—linked by a particle interaction in their past but now
separated by a great distance. The authors showed that the plain act of
measuring one atom of this pair would affect what one could measure
about the other atom, and the effect would be instantaneous—faster than
light and thus retroactive, as it were. Einstein considered this a damning
commentary on the laws of quantum mechanics. Bohr and younger
theorists maintained a more sanguine attitude, noting that Einstein himself
had already placed past and distance into the class of concepts about
which one could no longer speak with comfortable, classical certainty. In
the same vein was Schrödinger’s famous cat: a poor hypothetical animal
sitting in a box with a vial of poisonous gas attached to a detector, its fate
thus linked to that same quantum-mechanical event, the emission of a
photon from an atom. Schrödinger’s point was that, while physicists now
glibly calculated such events as probabilities—half yes and half no,
perhaps—they still could not visualize a cat as anything but alive or dead.

Physicists made a nervous truce with their own inability to construct
unambiguous mental models for events in the very small world. When they
used such words as wave or particle—and they had to use both—there
was a silent, disclaiming asterisk, as if to say: not really. As a
consequence, they recognized that their profession’s relationship to reality
had changed. Gone was the luxury of supposing that a single reality
existed, that the human mind had reasonably clear access to it, and that
the scientist could explain it. It was clear now that the scientist’s work
product—a theory, a model—interpreted experience and construed

experience in a way that was always provisional. Scientists relied on such
models as intensely as someone crossing a darkened room relies on a
conjured visual memory. Still, physicists now began to say explicitly that
they were creating a language—as though they were more like literary
critics than investigators. “It is wrong to think that the task of physics is to
find out how nature is,” said Bohr. “Physics concerns only what we can say
about nature.” This had always been true. Never before, though, had nature
so pointedly rubbed physicists’ noses in it.

Yet in the long run most physicists could not eschew visualization. They
found that they needed imagery. A certain kind of pragmatic, working
theorist valued a style of thinking based on a kind of seeing and feeling.
That was what physical intuition meant. Feynman said to Dyson, and
Dyson agreed, that Einstein’s great work had sprung from physical intuition
and that when Einstein stopped creating it was because “he stopped
thinking in concrete physical images and became a manipulator of
equations.” Intuition was not just visual but also auditory and kinesthetic.
Those who watched Feynman in moments of intense concentration came
away with a strong, even disturbing sense of the physicality of the process,
as though his brain did not stop with the gray matter but extended through
every muscle in his body. A Cornell dormitory neighbor opened Feynman’s
door to find him rolling about on the floor beside his bed as he worked on a
problem. When he was not rolling about, he was at least murmuring
rhythmically or drumming with his fingertips. In part the process of scientific
visualization is a process of putting oneself in nature: in an imagined beam
of light, in a relativistic electron. As the historian of science Gerald Holton
put it, “there is a mutual mapping of the mind … and of the laws of nature.”
For Feynman it was a nature whose elements interacted with palpable,
variegated, fluttering rhythms.

He thought about it himself. Once—uninterested though he was in fiction
or poetry—he carefully copied out a verse fragment by Vladimir Nabokov:
“Space is a swarming in the eyes; and time a singing in the ears.”

“Visualization—you keep repeating that,” he said to another historian,

Silvan S. Schweber, who was trying to interview him.

What I am really trying to do is bring birth to clarity, which is really a
half-assedly thought-out pictorial semi-vision thing. I would see the

jiggle-jiggle-jiggle or the wiggle of the path. Even now when I talk
about the influence functional, I see the coupling and I take this turn—
like as if there was a big bag of stuff—and try to collect it away and to
push it. It’s all visual. It’s hard to explain.

“In some ways you see the answer——?” asked Schweber.

——the character of the answer, absolutely. An inspired method of
picturing, I guess. Ordinarily I try to get the pictures clearer, but in the
end the mathematics can take over and be more efficient in
communicating the idea of the picture.

In certain particular problems that I have done it was necessary to
continue the development of the picture as the method before the
mathematics could be really done.

The field itself presented the ultimate challenge. Feynman once told
students, “I have no picture of this electromagnetic field that is in any sense
accurate.” In seeking to analyze his own way of visualizing the
unvisualizable he had learned an odd lesson. The mathematical symbols
he used every day had become entangled with his physical sensations of
motion, pressure, acceleration … Somehow he invested the abstract
symbols with physical meaning, even as he gained control over his raw
physical intuition by applying his knowledge of how the symbols could be
manipulated.

When I start describing the magnetic field moving through space, I
speak of the E- and B- fields and wave my arms and you may imagine
that I can see them. I’ll tell you what I see. I see some kind of vague,
shadowy, wiggling lines … and perhaps some of the lines have
arrows on them—an arrow here or there which disappears when I look
too closely… . I have a terrible confusion between the symbols I use to
describe the objects and the objects themselves.

Yet he could not retreat into the mathematics alone. Mathematically the
field was an array of numbers associated with every point in space. That,
he told his students, he could not imagine at all.

Visualization did not have to mean diagrams. A complex, half-

conscious, kinesthetic intuition about physics did not necessarily lend itself
to translation into the form of a stick-figure drawing. Nor did a diagram
necessarily express a physical picture. It could merely be a chart or a
memory aid. At any rate diagrams had been rare in the literature of
quantum physics. One typical example used a ladder of horizontal lines to
represent the notion of energy levels in the atom:

The “quantum jump” visualized as a sort of ladder.

The quantum jump from one level down to another accompanied the
emission of a photon; the absorption of a photon would bring a jump
upward. No depiction of the photons appeared in these diagrams; nor in
another, more awkward schematic for the same process.

Feynman never used such diagrams, but he often filled his note pages
with drawings of a different sort, recalling the space-time paths that had
been so crucial a feature of his Princeton work with Wheeler. He drew the
paths of electrons as straight lines, moving across the page to represent
motion through space and up the page to represent progress through time.
At first he, too, left the emission of a photon out of his pictures: that event
would appear as the deflection of an electron from one path to another.
The absence of photons did reflect an implicit choice from among the
available pictorial landscapes: Feynman was still thinking mainly in terms
of electrons interacting with the electromagnetic field as a field, rather than
with the field as incarnated in the form of particles, photons.

In mid-1947 friends of Feynman persuaded him—threats and cajoling

were required—to write for publication the theoretical ideas they kept
hearing him explain. When he finally did, he used no diagrams. The result
was partly a reworking of his thesis, but it also showed the maturing and
broadening of his command of the issues of quantum electrodynamics. He
expressed the tenets of his new vision with an unabashed plainness. For
some physicists this would be the most influential set of ideas Feynman
ever published.

He said he had developed an alternative formulation of quantum
mechanics to add to the pair of formulations produced two decades before
by Schrödinger and Heisenberg. He defined the notion of a probability
amplitude for a space-time path. In the classical world one could merely
add probabilities: a batter’s on-base percentage is the 30 percent
probability of a base hit plus the 10 percent probability of a base on balls
plus the 5 percent probability of an error … In the quantum world
probabilities were expressed as complex numbers, numbers with both a
quantity and a phase, and these so-called amplitudes were squared to
produce a probability. This was the mathematical procedure necessary to
capture the wavelike aspects of particle behavior. Waves interfered with
one another. They could enhance one another or cancel one another,
depending on whether they were in or out of phase. Light could combine
with light to produce darkness, alternating with bands of brightness, just as
water waves combining in a lake could produce doubly deep troughs and
high crests.

Feynman described for his readers what they already knew as the
canonical thought experiment of quantum mechanics, the so-called two-slit
experiment. For Niels Bohr it had illustrated the inescapable paradox of
the wave-particle duality. A beam of electrons (for example) passes
through two slits in a screen. A detector on the far side records their arrival.
If the detector is sensitive enough, it will record individual events, like
bullets striking; it might be designed to click as a Geiger counter clicks.
But a peculiar spatial pattern emerges: the probabilities of electrons
arriving at different places vary in the distinct manner of diffraction,
precisely as though waves were passing through the slit and interfering
with one another. Particles or waves? Sealing the paradox, quantum
mechanically, is a conclusion that one cannot escape: that each electron
“sees,” or “knows about,” or somehow goes through both slits. Classically

a particle would have to go through one slit or the other. Yet in this
experiment, if the slits are alternately closed, so that one electron must go
through A and the next through B, the interference pattern vanishes. If one
tries to glimpse the particle as it passes through one slit or the other,
perhaps by placing a detector at a slit, again one finds that the mere
presence of the detector destroys the pattern.

Probability amplitudes were normally associated with the likelihood of a
particle’s arriving at a certain place at a certain time. Feynman said he
would associate the probability amplitude “with an entire motion of a
particle”—with a path. He stated the central principle of his quantum
mechanics: The probability of an event which can happen in several
different ways is the absolute square of a sum of complex contributions,
one from each alternative way. These complex numbers, 
these
amplitudes, were written in terms of the classical action; he showed how to
calculate the action for each path as a certain integral. And he established
that this peculiar approach was mathematically equivalent to the standard
Schrödinger wave function, so different in spirit.
The central mystery of quantum mechanics—the one to which all others
could ultimately be reduced.

 A gun (obeying the classical laws) sprays bullets
toward a target. First they must pass through a screen with two slits. The
pattern they make shows how their probability of arrival varies from place
to place. They are likeliest to strike directly behind one of the slits. The
pattern happens to be simply the sum of the patterns for each slit
considered separately: if half the bullets were fired with only the left slit
open and then half were fired with just the right slit open, the result would
be the same.

With waves, however, the result is very different, because of interference. If
the slits were opened one at a time, the pattern would resemble the pattern
for bullets: two distinct peaks. But when the slits are open at the same
time, the waves pass through both slits at once and interfere with each
other: where they are in phase they reinforce each other; where they are
out of phase they cancel each other out.

Now the quantum paradox: Particles, like bullets, strike the target one at a
time. Yet, like waves, they create an interference pattern. If each particle
passes individually through one slit, with what does it “interfere”? Although
each electron arrives at the target at a single place and a single time, it
seems that each has passed through—or somehow felt the presence of—
both slits at once.

The Physical Review had printed nothing by Feynman since his
undergraduate thesis almost a decade before. To his dismay, the editors
now rejected this paper. Bethe helped him rewrite it, showing him how to
spell out for the reader what was old and what was new, and he tried the
more retrospective journal Reviews of Modern Physics, where finally it
appeared the next spring under the title “Space-Time Approach to NonRelativistic Quantum Mechanics.” He plainly admitted that his reformulation
of quantum mechanics contained nothing new in the way of results, and he
stated even more plainly where he thought the merit lay: “There is a
pleasure in recognizing old things from a new point of view. Also, there are
problems for which the new point of view offers a distinct advantage.” (For
example, when two particles interacted, it became possible to avoid the
laborious bookkeeping of two different coordinate systems.) His readers—

and at first they were few—found no fancy mathematics, just this shift of
vision, a bit of physical intuition laid atop a foundation of clean, classical
mechanics.

Few immediately recognized the power of Feynman’s vision. One who
did was the Polish mathematician Mark Kac, who heard Feynman
describe his path integrals at Cornell and immediately recognized a
kinship with a problem in probability theory. He had been trying to extend
the work of Norbert Wiener on Brownian motion, the herky-jerky random
motion in the diffusion processes that so dominated Feynman’s theoretical
work at Los Alamos. Wiener, too, had created integrals that summed many
possible paths a particle could take, but with a crucial difference in the
handling of time. Within days of Feynman’s talk, Kac had created a new
formula, the Feynman-Kac Formula, that became one of the most
ubiquitous of mathematical tools, linking the applications of probability and
quantum mechanics. He later felt that he was better known as the K in F-K
than for anything else in his career.

Even to physicists well accustomed to theoretical constructions with
awkward philosophical implications, Feynman’s summings of paths—path
integrals—seemed bizarre. They conjured a universe where no potential
goes uncounted; where nothing is latent, everything alive; where every
possibility makes itself felt in the outcome. He had expressed his
conception to Dyson:

The electron does anything it likes. It just goes in any direction at
any speed, forward or backward in time, however it likes, and then you
add up the amplitudes and it gives you the wave function.

Dyson gleefully retorted that he was crazy. Still, Feynman had caught the
intuitive essence of the two-slit experiment, where an electron seems
aware of every possibility.

Feynman’s path-integral view of nature, his vision of a “sum over
histories,” was also the principle of least action, the principle of least time,
reborn. Feynman felt that he had uncovered the deep laws that gave rise to
the centuries-old principles of mechanics and optics discovered by
Christiaan Huygens, Pierre de Fermat, and Joseph-Louis Lagrange. How
does a thrown ball know to find the particular arc whose path minimizes

action? How does a ray of light know to find the path that minimizes time?
Feynman answered these questions with images that served not only for
the novel mysteries of quantum mechanics but for the treacherously
innocent exercises posed for any beginning physics student. Light seems
to angle neatly as it passes from air to water. It seems to bounce like a
billiard ball off the surface of a mirror. It seems to travel in straight lines.
These paths—the paths of least time—are special because they tend to
be where the contributions of nearby paths are most closely in phase and
most reinforce one another. Far from the path of least time—at the distant
edge of a mirror, for example—paths tend to cancel one another out. Yet
light does take every possible path, Feynman showed. The seemingly
irrelevant paths are always lurking in the background, making their
contributions, ready to make their presence felt in such phenomena as
mirages and diffraction gratings.

Optics students learned alternative explanations for such phenomena in
terms of waves like those undulating through water and air. Feynman was
—with finality—eliminating the wave viewpoint altogether. Waviness was
built into the phases carried by amplitudes, like little clocks. Once, with
Wheeler, he had dreamed of eliminating the field itself. That idea had
proved fanciful. The field had lodged itself deeply in the consciousness of
physicists. It was indispensable and it was multiplying—a new particle,
such as the meson, meant a new field, like a new plastic overlay, of which
the particle was a quantized manifestation. Still, Feynman’s theory retained
the mark of its original scaffolding, though the scaffolding was long
discarded. The actors were, more clearly than ever, particles. That
became an attractive feature for physicists seeking help in visualization, in
an experimental world dominated more and more by the cloud trails, the
nomenclature, the behaviorism of particles.

Schwinger’s Glory

Feynman’s path integrals belonged to a loose kit of ideas and methods, a
private physics that he had assembled but not organized. Much relied on
guesswork or, as he said, “semi-empirical shenanigans.” It was all
hodgepodge and purpose-driven, and he could barely communicate it, let

alone prove it, even to his most sympathetic listeners, Bethe and Dyson. In
the fall of 1947 he attended a formal lecture by Bethe on his approach to
the Lamb shift. When Bethe concluded by stressing the need for a more
reliable way of making the theory finite, a way that would observe the
requirements of relativity, Feynman realized that he could compute the
necessary correction. He promised Bethe an answer by the next morning.

By morning he realized that he did not know enough about Bethe’s
calculation of the electron’s self-energy to translate his correction into the
normal language of physics. They stood together at the blackboard for a
while, Bethe explaining his calculation, Feynman trying to translate his
technique, and the best answer they could reach diverged not modestly,
like Bethe’s, but horrendously. Feynman, thinking about the problem
physically, was sure it should not diverge at all.

In the days that followed, he taught himself about self-energy all over
again. When he reexpressed his equations in terms of the observed,
“dressed” mass of the electron instead of the theoretical, “bare” mass, the
correction came out just as he had thought, converging to a finite answer.
Meanwhile, glowing news of Schwinger’s progress was reaching Ithaca
from Cambridge via Weisskopf and Bethe. When Feynman heard late in
the fall that Schwinger had worked out a calculation for the magnetic
moment of the electron—another tiny experimental anomaly newly found in
Rabi’s laboratory—he solved the problem, too. Schwinger’s elaborate
piece of calculating gave leading physicists a conviction that theory was
once again on the march. “God is great!” Rabi wrote Bethe with
characteristic wryness, and Bethe replied: “It is certainly wonderful how
these experiments of yours have given a completely new slant to a theory
and how the theory has blossomed out in a relatively short time. It is as
exciting as in the early days of quantum mechanics.”

felt 

Feynman 

increasingly competitive about Schwinger, and
increasingly frustrated. He had his quantum electrodynamics, he believed,
and what he now thought of as “the Schwinger-Weisskopf-Bethe camp”
had another. In January the American Physical Society met in New York,
and Schwinger was the star. His program was not complete, but he had
integrated the new idea of renormalization into the standard quantum
mechanics in a way that let him demonstrate a series of impressive
derivations. He showed how the anomalous magnetic moment, like the

Lamb shift, came from the electron’s interaction with its own field. His
lecture drew a crowd that packed the hall. Too many physicists were
forced to stand out in the corridors to hear the bursts of applause (and the
embarrassed laughter that came when Schwinger finally said, “It is quite
clear that …”). Hasty arrangements were made for Schwinger to repeat the
lecture later the same day in Columbia’s McMillin Theater. Dyson
attended. Oppenheimer smoked his pipe conspicuously in the front row.
Feynman rose during the question period to say that he, too, had reached
these results and that, in fact, he could offer a small correction. Immediately
he regretted it. He thought he must have sounded like a little boy piping up
with “I did it too, Daddy.” Few people that winter realized the depths of the
rivalry he felt, but he made a bitter remark to a girlfriend, who understood
the drift of his disappointment if not the exact circumstances.

“I’m so sorry that your long worked-on experiment was more or less
stolen by someone else,” she wrote back. “I know it just makes you feel
sick. But Dick dear, how could life or things be interesting if there was not
competition?” She wondered, why couldn’t he and his competitor combine
their ideas and work together?

Schwinger and Feynman were not alone in trying to produce the
calculations—the explanation—required by the immediate experiments on
the Lamb shift and the electron’s magnetic moment. Other theorists
followed the lead provided by Bethe’s back-of-the-envelope approach.
They saw no need to create a monumental new quantum electrodynamics,
when they might generate the right numbers merely by patching the
technique of renormalization onto the existing physics. Independently, two
pairs of scientists succeeded in this, producing solutions that went beyond
Bethe’s in that they took into account the way masses fattened at
relativistic speeds. Before publishing, one team, Weisskopf and a
graduate student, Bruce French, committed a fatal act of indecision by
consulting both Schwinger and Feynman. Engrossed in their more
ambitious programs, Schwinger and Feynman each warned Weisskopf
off, saying that he was in error by a small factor. Weisskopf decided it was
inconceivable 
these brilliant upstarts could both be wrong,
independently, and delayed his manuscript. Months passed before
Feynman called apologetically to say that Weisskopf’s answer had been
correct.

that 

For Feynman’s own developing theory, a breakthrough came when he
confronted the ticklish area of antimatter. The first antiparticle, the negative
electron, or positron, had been born less than two decades earlier as a
minus sign in Dirac’s equations—a consequence of a symmetry between
positive and negative energy. Dirac had been forced to conceive of holes
in a sea of energy, noting in 1931 that “a hole, if there were one, would be
a new kind of particle, unknown to experimental physics.” Unknown for the
next few months—then Carl Anderson, at Caltech, found the trail of one in a
cloud chamber built to detect cosmic rays. It looked like an electron, but it
swerved up through a magnetic field when it should have swerved down.

The vivid photographs, along with the lively name coined by a journal
editor against Anderson’s will, gave the positron a legitimacy that theorists
found hard to ignore. The collision of an electron with its antimatter cousin
released energy in the form of gamma rays. Alternatively, in Dirac’s picture
of the vacuum as a lively sea populated by occasional holes, or bubbles,
one could say that the electron fell into a hole and filled it, so that both the
hole and the electron would disappear. As experimentalists continued to
study their cosmic-ray photographs, they also found the reverse process: a
gamma ray, nothing more than a high-frequency particle of light, could
spontaneously produce a pair of particles, one electron and one positron.

Dirac’s picture had difficulties. As elsewhere in his physics, unwanted
infinities arose. The simplest description of the vacuum, empty space at
absolute zero, seemed to require infinite energy and infinite charge. And
from the practical perspective of anyone trying to write proper equations,
the infinitude of presumed particles caused infernal complications.
Feynman, seeking a way out, turned again to the forward- and backwardflowing version of time in his work with Wheeler at Princeton. Once again
he proposed a space-time picture in which the positron was a timereversed electron. The geometry of this vision could hardly have been
simpler, but it was so unfamiliar that Feynman strained for metaphors:

“Suppose a black thread be immersed in a cube of collodion, which is
then hardened,” he wrote. “Imagine the thread, although not necessarily
quite straight, runs from top to bottom. The cube is now sliced horizontally
into thin square layers, which are put together to form successive frames of
a motion picture.” Each slice, each cross-section, would show a dot, and
the dot would move about to reveal the path of the thread, instant by

instant. Now suppose, he said, the thread doubled back on itself,
“somewhat like the letter N.” To the observer, seeing the successive slices
but not the thread’s entirety, the effect would resemble the production of a
particle-antiparticle pair:

In successive frames first there would be just one dot but suddenly
two new ones would appear when the frames come from layers cutting
the thread through the reversed section. They would all three move
about for a while then two would come together and annihilate, leaving
only a single dot in the final frames.

The usual equations of electron motion covered this model, he said, though
it did require “a more tortuous path in space and time than one is used to
considering.” He remained dissatisfied with the analogy of the thread and
kept looking for more intuitive ways to express his view, capturing as it did
the essence of the distinction between seeing paths in time-bound slices
and seeing them whole. A Cornell student who had served as a wartime
bombardier had a suggestion, and the bombardier metaphor, the one
Feynman finally published, became famous.

A bombardier watching a single road through the bomb-sight of a
low flying plane suddenly sees three roads, the confusion only
resolving itself when two of them move together and disappear and he
realizes he has only passed over a long reverse switchback of a
single road. The reversed section represents the positron in analogy,
which is first created along with an electron and then moves about and
annihilates another electron.

That was the broad picture. His path-integral method suited the model
well: he knew from his old work with Wheeler that the summing of the
phases of nearby paths would apply to “negative time” as well. He also

found a shortcut past complications that had arisen because of the Pauli
exclusion principle, the essential law of quantum mechanics that forbade
two electrons from inhabiting the same quantum state. He granted himself
a bizarre dispensation from the exclusion principle on the basis that, where
earlier calculations had seen two particles, there was actually just one,
taking a zigzag back and forth through a slice of time. “Usual theory says
no, because then at time between ty, tx can’t have 2 electrons in same
state,” he jotted in a note to himself. “We say it is same electron so Pauli
exclusion doesn’t operate.” It sounded like something from the science
fiction of time travel—hardly a notion designed for ready acceptance. He
knew well 
the
that he was proposing a radical departure 
commonsense experience of time. He was violating the everyday intuition
that the future does not yet exist and that the past has passed. All he could
say was that time in physics had already departed from time in psychology
—that nothing in the microscopic laws of physics seemed to mandate a
distinction between past and future, and that Einstein had already ruined
the notion of absolute time, independent of the observer. Yet Einstein had
not imagined a particle’s history reversing course and swerving back
against the current. Feynman could only resort to an argument from utility:
“It may prove useful in physics,” he wrote, “to consider events in all of time
at once and to imagine that we at each instant are only aware of those that
lie behind us.”

from 

My Machines Came from Too Far Away

Schwinger and Feynman were both looking ahead to the inevitable sequel
to the elite Shelter Island meeting. A new gathering was planned for late
March at a resort in the Pocono Mountains of Pennsylvania: again the
setting was to be pastoral, the roster intimate, the agenda profound.
Success had enhanced the already high-status guest list. Fermi, Bethe,
Rabi, Teller, Wheeler, and von Neumann were returning, along with
Oppenheimer as chairman, and now they would be joined by two giants of
prewar physics, Dirac and Bohr.

They gathered on March 30, 1948, in a lounge under a tarnished green
clock tower with a view over a golf course and fifty miles of rolling

woodlands. The presentations opened with the latest news of particle
tracks in cosmic-ray showers and in the accelerator at Berkeley. With its
sixteen-foot magnet the Berkeley synchrotron promised to push protons up
to energies of 350 million electron volts by fall, enough to re-create copious
bursts of the new elementary (so it seemed) particle called the meson, the
cosmic-ray particle of most current topical interest. Instead of waiting for
the cosmos 
their cloud chambers,
experimenters would finally be able to make their own.

to send samples down 

into 

There had been a problem with the cosmic-ray data, an enormous
discrepancy between the expected and the observed strengths of the
mesons’ interactions with other particles. At Shelter Island a young
physicist, Robert Marshak, had proposed a solution requiring more
courage and ingenuity in 1947 than such solutions would need in decades
to come: namely, that there must be a second species of particle mixed in
with the first. Not one meson but two—it seemed so obvious once
someone dared break the ice. Feynman gleefully said they would have to
call the new particle a marshak. Abetted by technology, the roster of
elementary particles was climbing toward double digits. As the Pocono
meeting opened, experimentalists warmed up the audience by showing
pictures of an increasingly characteristic sort. Particles made impressive
chicken-claw tracks in the photographs. No one could see fields, or
matrices, or operators, but the geometry of particle scattering could not
have been more vivid.

The next morning Schwinger took the floor. He began to present for the
first time a complete theory of quantum electrodynamics that, as he
stressed at the outset, met the dual criteria of “relativistic invariance” and
“gauge invariance.” It was a theory, that is, whose calculations looked the
same no matter what velocity or phase its particles chose. These
invariances assured that the theory would be unchanged by the arbitrary
perspective of the observer, just as the time from sunrise to sunset does
not depend on whether one has set one’s clock forward to daylight saving
time. The theory would have to make sure that calculations never tied
themselves to a particular reference system, or “gauge.” Schwinger told his
listeners that he would consider a quantized electromagnetic field in which
“each small volume of space is now to be handled as a particle”—a
particle with more mathematical power and less visual presence than

those of the previous day. He introduced a difficult new notation and set
about to derive a sampling of specific results for such “applications” as the
interaction of an electron with its own field. If his distinguished listeners
found themselves in darkness, they were nevertheless not so easily cowed
as Schwinger’s customary audiences, and the usual express train found
itself halted by interruptions. Bohr himself broke in with a question—
Schwinger hated this and cut him off abruptly. Finally he managed to move
forward, promising that all would be made clear in due course. As always,
he made a point of lecturing without notes, and nearly all of his
presentation was formal, deriving one equation after another. His talk
became a marathon, lasting late into the afternoon. Bethe noticed that the
formal mathematics silenced the critics, who raised questions only when
Schwinger tried to express plainly physical ideas. He mentioned this to
Feynman, suggesting that he, too, take a mathematical approach to his
presentation. Fermi, glancing about at his famous colleagues, noticed with
some satisfaction that one by one they had let their attention drift away.
Only he and Bethe managed to stay with Schwinger to the end, he thought.
Then it was Feynman’s turn. He was uneasy. It seemed to him that
Schwinger’s talk, though a bravura performance, had not gone well (but he
was wrong—everyone, and crucially Oppenheimer, had been impressed).
Bethe’s warning made him reverse his planned presentation. He had
meant to stay as closely as possible to physical ideas. He did have a
mathematical formalism, as private though not as intricate as Schwinger’s,
and he could show how to derive his rules and methods from the
formalism, but he could not justify the mathematics itself. He had reached it
by trial and error. He knew it was correct, because he had tried it now on
so many problems, including all of Schwinger’s, and it worked, but he could
not prove that it worked and he could not connect it to the old quantum
mechanics. Nevertheless he took Bethe’s advice and began with
equations, saying, “This is a mathematical formula which I will now show
you produces all the results of quantum mechanics.”

He had always told his friends that once he started talking about physics
he did not care who his audience was. One of his favorite stories was
about Bohr, who had singled him out at Los Alamos as a young man
unafraid to dispute his elders. Bohr had consulted Feynman privately there
from time to time, often through his physicist son, Aage. Still, he had never

fully warmed to Feynman, with his overeager, American, working-class
style. Now Bohr waited, at the end of a long day, in this formidable
audience of twenty-six men. Not even at Princeton, when he lectured to
Einstein and Pauli, had Feynman stood before such a concentration of the
great minds of his science. He had created a new quantum mechanics
almost without reading the old, but he had made two exceptions: he had
learned from the work of Dirac and Fermi, both now seated before him.
His teachers Wheeler and Bethe were there. So were Oppenheimer, who
had built one bomb, and Teller, who was building the next. They had known
him as a promising, fearless young light. His thirtieth birthday was seven
weeks away.

Schwinger himself was hearing Feynman’s theory for the first time. He
thought it intellectually repulsive, though he did not say so (and afterward
they cordially compared techniques and found themselves in nearly perfect
agreement). He could see that Feynman was offering a patchwork of
guesses and intuition. It struck him as engineering, all I-beams and Tbeams. Bethe interrupted once, sensing that the audience was numbed
with detail, and tried to return Feynman to fundamentals. Feynman
explained his path integrals, an alien idea, and his positrons moving
backward in time, even more disturbing. Teller caught the apparent
infringement of the exclusion principle and refused to accept Feynman’s
unrigorous justification. It struck Feynman that everyone had a favorite
principle or theorem and he was violating them all. When Dirac asked, “Is it
unitary?” Feynman did not even know what he meant. Dirac explained: the
matrix that carries one from the past to the future had to maintain an exact
bookkeeping of total probability. But Feynman had no such matrix. The
essence of his approach was a view of past and future together, with the
freedom to go forward or backward in time at will. He was getting almost
nothing across. Finally, as he sketched diagrams on the blackboard—
schematic trajectories of particles—and tried to show his method of
summing the amplitudes for different paths, Bohr rose to object. Had
Feynman ignored the central lesson of two decades of quantum
mechanics? It was obvious, Bohr said, that such trajectories violated the
uncertainty principle. He stepped to the blackboard, gestured Feynman
aside, and began to explain. Wheeler, taking notes, quickly jotted, “Bohr
Has Raised The Question As To Whether This Point Of View Has Not The

Same Physical Content As The Theory Of Dirac, But Differs In A Manner
Of Speaking Of Things Which Are Not Well-Defined Physically.” Bohr
continued for long minutes. That was when Feynman knew he had failed.
At the time, he was in anguish. Later he said simply: “I had too much stuff.
My machines came from too far away.”

There Was Also Presented (by Feynman) …

Wheeler had arranged as rapid a news service as the available technology
permitted. On his first day back in Princeton he pressed his graduate
students into service as scribes. They reproduced his notes page by page
onto mimeograph blanks and printed dozens of copies, turning their
forearms magenta. For months this samizdat document served as the only
available introduction to the new Schwingerian covariant quantum
electrodynamics. Only a few pages were devoted to Feynman, with his
“alternative formulation” and curious diagrams. Dyson read the Wheeler
notes avidly. Bethe had tried to get him an invitation to Pocono (“you can
imagine that I was highly pleased and flattered,” Dyson wrote his parents),
but Oppenheimer refused to consider someone whose current caste was
student.

Feynman himself was assigned the task of writing a nontechnical
account of the Pocono meeting for a new trade journal for physicists,
Physics Today—anonymously, he hoped. He explained renormalization à
la Schwinger, concluding:

A major portion of the conference was spent in hearing and
discussing these results of Schwinger. (((One conferee put it: “We did
not have time to discuss a great deal, for we had to take time out to
learn some physics.” He was referring to this work of Schwinger.)))

There was also presented (by Feynman) a theory in which the
equations of electrodynamics are artificially altered so that all
quantities including the inertia of the electron turn out finite. The results
of this theory are in essential agreement with those of Schwinger, but
they are not as complete.

In the same runner-up vein Feynman was asked to help select a winner for
a new prize the National Academy of Sciences was awarding for “an
outstanding contribution to our knowledge of the nature of light.” When
Schwinger saw Feynman’s name on the list of judges, he inferred correctly
that the prize was meant for him. What was quantum electrodynamics
about, if not light, in all its many dresses?

No one had been more definitively impressed by Schwinger, and
unimpressed by Feynman, than Oppenheimer. Awaiting him back in
Princeton was a startling confirmation of Schwinger’s theory, in the form of
a letter from a Japanese theorist, Shin’ichirō Tomonaga, whose claim to
glory began with the words: “I have taken the liberty of sending you copies
of several papers and notes …”

Japan’s physicists had just begun making significant contributions to the
international community in the 1930s—it had been Hideki Yukawa at Kyōto
University who first proposed that a massive, short-lived, undiscovered
particle might act as a “carrier” of the nuclear force, binding protons
together in the atom’s core—when the war isolated them utterly. Even with
the war’s end, channels to occupied Japan opened slowly. News of the
Lamb shift reached Kyōto and Tokyo not through American physicists and
not through journals, but from a squib in a newsmagazine.

Tomonaga, a native of Tokyo and a graduate of Kyōto University, a
classmate and friend of Yukawa, had been deeply influenced by Dirac; he
belonged to a small group that translated Dirac’s famous textbook into
Japanese. In 1937 he traveled to Germany to study with Heisenberg;
returning at the war’s onset in 1939, he stopped briefly in New York to visit
the World’s Fair. He worked out what he called a “super many time” theory,
in which every point in the field had its own clock—a workable notion, he
found, despite the seeming absurdity of trying to manipulate infinitely many
time variables. In his thoughts on physics he traversed much of the ground
covered by his European and American counterparts, but with a far greater
sense of solitude, hardly diminished by his time in Germany. He recorded
a dark mood in his diary from time to time:

After supper I took up my physics again, but at last I gave up. Illstarred work indeed! … Recently I have felt very sad without any
reason, so I went to a film… . Returning home I read a book on

physics. I don’t understand it very well… . Why isn’t nature clearer and
more directly comprehensible? … As I went on with the calculation, I
found the integral diverged—was infinite. After lunch I went for a walk.
The air was astringently cold… . All of us stand on the dividing line
from which the future is invisible. We need not be too anxious about
the results, even though they may turn out quite different from what you
expect… .

His occasional emotional desolation paled in light of what faced him in the
months after the surrender, when shortages of food and housing
overshadowed all else in Japan. He made a home and an office in a
battered Quonset hut on the Tokyo University grounds. He furnished it with
mats.

Although Oppenheimer knew nothing of Tomonaga’s personal
circumstances, he knew what he and his Los Alamos compatriots had
wrought on Japan, and he also wished to preserve the internationalism of
physics in the face of what suddenly seemed an American hegemony. He
could hardly have been better placed to appreciate Tomonaga’s letter—
clear evidence that a Japanese physicist had not just matched the
essentials of Schwinger’s work but had anticipated it. Tomonaga had not
published, and he had not created the entire Schwingerian tapestry, but he
had been first. Oppenheimer immediately gave Tomonaga his imprimatur
in a letter to each of the Pocono participants. “Just because we were able
to hear Schwinger’s beautiful report,” he wrote, “we may better be able to
appreciate this independent development.” For Dyson, working in
Pocono’s aftermath to understand the new theories, the revelation of
Tomonaga’s papers lay in what seemed a simple beauty. He thought that
he now understood Schwinger and that not all Schwinger’s complications
were necessary. Graduate students poring over the Pocono notes already
suspected this, despite the acclaim their elders were awarding. Later
Dyson quoted “an unkind critic” as having said, “Other people publish to
show how to do it, but Julian Schwinger publishes to show you that only he
can do it.” He seemed to strive for an exceptional ratio of equations to text,
and the prose posed serious challenges to the Physical Review’s
typesetters.

Schwinger occasionally heard what sounded like carping amid the

applause: comments to the effect that he was a soulless Paganini, all flash
and technique instead of music; that he was more mathematician than
physicist; that he too carefully smoothed the rough edges. “I gather I stand
accused,” Schwinger said later, “of presenting a finished elaborate
mathematical formalism from which had been excised all the physical
insights that provide signposts to its construction.”

He had removed the signposts. He never liked to show the rough
pathways of his thinking, any more than he liked to let his audiences see
notes when he lectured. Yet all his mathematical power could not have
produced his joining of relativity and quantum electrodynamics if he had
lacked the intuition of a physicist. Beneath the formalism lay a profound—
and historically minded—conviction about the nature of particles and fields.
To Schwinger renormalization was not just a mathematical trick. Rather it
marked a mutation in physicists’ understanding of what a particle was. His
central physical insight, had he expressed it in the compromised language
of everyday speech, might have sounded like this:

Are we talking about particles or are we talking about waves? Until now,
everyone has thought that their equations—the Dirac equation, for
example, which is supposed to describe the hydrogen atom—referred
directly to the physical particles. Now, in a field theory, we recognize that
the equations refer to a sublevel. Experimentally we are concerned with
particles, yet the old equations describe fields. When you talk about
fields, you presume that you can describe, and somehow experience,
exactly what goes on at every point in space at every time; when you talk
about particles, you merely sample the field with measurements at
occasional instants.

A particle is a cohesive thing. We know we have a particle only when
the same thing stays there as time goes on. The very language of
particles implies phenomena with continuity over space and time. Yet if
you make measurements at only disconnected instants, how do you
know there is a particle? Experiments probe the field only crudely—they
look at large spaces over long times.

The essence of renormalization is to make the transition from one
level of description to the next. When you begin with field equations, you
operate at a level when particles are not there from the start. It is when

you solve the field equations that you see the emergence of particles.
But the properties—the mass and the charge—that you ascribe to a
particle are not those inherent in the original equations.

Other people say, “Oh, the equations have divergences, you have to
cancel them out.” That is only the form, not the essence of
renormalization. The essence lies in recognizing that the theories of
Maxwell and Dirac are not about electrons, positrons, and photons but
about a deeper level.

Cross-Country with Freeman Dyson

Feynman had a tendency to vanish with the end of the school year, leaving
behind a vacuum populated by uncorrected papers, ungraded tests,
unwritten letters of recommendation. Often Bethe covered for his lapses in
the paperwork of teaching. Still, June might bring a tirade from Lloyd
Smith, the department chairman:

Your sudden departure from Ithaca without completing the grades
in your courses, especially those involving seniors who may thus be
prevented from graduating, has caused the Department considerable
embarrassment. I have begun to be somewhat apprehensive over
what would appear to be a feeling of indifference concerning the
obligations and responsibilities to the University …

Feynman would jot some grades—round numbers, none higher than 85—
and then start doodling equations.

This June found him at the wheel of his secondhand Oldsmobile, rushing
across the country at a constant 65 miles per hour. In the passenger seat
Freeman Dyson eyed the scenery and occasionally wished Feynman
would slow down. Feynman thought Dyson was a bit dignified. Dyson liked
the role of foreign observer of the American scene: here was his chance to
play Tocqueville peering at the wild West from the vantage point of Route
66. Missouri, the Mississippi River (thick and reddish-brown, just as he
had imagined it), Kansas, Oklahoma—none of this struck him as very
Western, actually. In fact it looked not unlike his rural corner of New York.

He had decided that modern America resembled Victorian England,
particularly in the attention devoted to furnishing middle-class homes and
women. His destination was Ann Arbor, Michigan, where he intended to
pursue Schwinger, who was presenting his work in a series of summerschool lectures. Feynman, meanwhile, was heading for Albuquerque to
resolve an entanglement with a woman he had known at Los Alamos. (She
was Rose McSherry, a secretary whom he dated after Arline’s death.
Another of Feynman’s current attachments was needling him by calling
McSherry his “movie queen.” Dyson’s guess was that he would marry her.)
Dyson realized that he was not taking the direct route to Ann Arbor, but
he relished the chance to spend time with Feynman. No one interested him
as much. In the months since Pocono, he had begun to think that his
mission might be to find a synthesis of the difficult new theories of quantum
electrodynamics—rival theories, as he saw it, though to most of the
community the rivalry seemed lopsided. He had heard Feynman’s theory in
informal blackboard sessions, and it still troubled him that Feynman was,
as it seemed, merely writing down answers instead of solving equations in
the normal manner. He wanted to understand more.

They drove, sometimes stopping for hitchhikers, more often maintaining
a determined pace, and Feynman confided more in Dyson than he had
done with any friend in his adult life. He startled Dyson with a grim outlook
on the future. He felt certain that the world had seen only the beginning of
nuclear war. The memory of Trinity, sheer ebullient joy at the time, haunted
him now. Philip Morrison, his Cornell colleague, had published an
admonitory description of an atomic blast on East 20th Street in Manhattan
—Morrison had witnessed the Hiroshima aftermath and wrote this account
in a horrifyingly vivid past tense—and Feynman could not meet his mother
at a midtown restaurant without thinking about the radius of destruction. He
could not shake a feeling that normal people, without the burden of his
accursed knowledge, were living a pitiful illusion, like ants tunneling and
building before the giant’s boot comes down. This was a classic danger
sign—the feeling of being the only sane man, the only man who truly sees
—but Dyson suddenly felt that Feynman was as sane as anyone he knew.
This was not the jester he had first described to his parents. Dyson wrote
later: “As we drove through Cleveland and St. Louis, he was measuring in
his mind’s eye distances from ground zero, ranges of lethal radiation and

blast and fire damage… . I felt as if I were taking a ride with Lot through
Sodom and Gomorrah.”

As they drew closer to Albuquerque, Feynman was also thinking about
Arline. Sometimes it occurred to him that her death might have left him with
a feeling of impermanence. Spring flooding in the Oklahoma prairie closed
the highway. Dyson had never seen rain fall in such dense curtains—nature
as raw as these plainspoken Americans, he thought. The car radio
reported people trapped in cars, drowned or rescued by boats. They
pulled off the road in a town called Vinita and found lodging in a hotel of the
kind Feynman knew all too well from his weekend trips to visit Arline: an
“office” on the second floor, a sign reading, “This hotel is under new
management, so if you’re drunk you came to the wrong place,” a hanging
cloth covering the doorway to the room he shared with Dyson for fifty cents
apiece. That night he told Dyson more about Arline than ever before.
Neither of them forgot it.

They talked about their aspirations for science. Feynman cared far less
than Dyson about his still-patchwork scheme for renormalizing quantum
electrodynamics. It was his sum-over-histories theory of physics that
claimed his passion. As Dyson saw, it was a grand vision and a unifying
vision—too ambitious, he thought. Too many physicists had already
stumbled in pursuit of this grail, including Einstein, notoriously. Dyson—
more than anyone who heard Feynman at Pocono or attended his
occasional seminars at Cornell, more even than Bethe—was beginning to
see just how far Feynman sought to reach. He was not ready to concede
that his friend could out-Einstein Einstein. He admired Feynman’s gall, the
largeness of his dream, the implicit attempt to unify realms of physics that
were more distant from one another than anything in human experience.
On the largest scale, the scale of solar systems and galactic clusters,
gravity reigned. On the smallest scale, particles still awaiting discovery
bound the atom’s nucleus with unimaginably strong forces. Dyson
considered it enough to walk the “middle ground,” the realm that after all
encompassed everything in between: the furniture of everyday life, the
foundations underlying chemistry and biology. The middle ground, where
quantum theory ruled, extended to all phenomena that could be seen and
studied without the help of either a mammoth telescope or a behemoth
particle accelerator. Yet Feynman wanted more.

It was essential to his view of things that it must be universal. It
must describe everything that happens in nature. You could not
imagine the sum-over-histories picture being true for a part of nature
and untrue for another part. You could not imagine it being true for
electrons and untrue for gravity. It was a unifying principle that would
either explain everything or explain nothing.

Many years later each man recalled their night in Vinita, Dyson showing
how unshakably he revered his friend still, Feynman showing how he could
use storytelling as a strategy—a dagger and a cloak. Dyson wrote:

In that little room, with the rain drumming on the dirty window
panes, we talked the night through. Dick talked of his dead wife, of the
joy he had had in nursing her and making her last days tolerable, of
the tricks they had played together on the Los Alamos security people,
of her jokes and her courage. He talked of death with an easy
familiarity which can come only to one who has lived with spirit
unbroken through the worst that death can do. Ingmar Bergman in his
film The Seventh Seal created the character of the juggler Jof, always
joking and playing the fool, seeing visions and dreams that nobody
else believes in, surviving at the end when death carries the rest away.
Dick and Jof have a great deal in common.

And Feynman:

The room was fairly clean, it had a sink; it wasn’t so bad. We get

ready for bed.

He says, “I’ve got to pee.”
“The bathroom is down the hall.”
We hear girls giggling and walking back and forth in the hall

outside, and he’s nervous. He doesn’t want to go out there.

“That’s all right; just pee in the sink,” I say.
“But that’s unsanitary.”

“Naw, it’s okay; you just turn the water on.”
“I can’t pee in the sink,” he says.
We’re both tired, so we lie down. It’s so hot that we don’t use any
covers, and my friend can’t get to sleep because of the noises in the
place. I kind of fall asleep a little bit.

A little later I hear a creaking of the floor nearby, and I open one eye

slightly. There he is, in the dark, quietly stepping over to the sink.

And Dyson:

That stormy night in our little room in Vinita, Dick and I were not
looking thirty years ahead. I knew only that somewhere hidden in
Dick’s ideas was the key to a theory of quantum electrodynamics
simpler and more physical than Julian Schwinger’s elaborate
construction. Dick knew only that he had larger aims in view than
tidying up Schwinger’s equations. So the argument did not come to an
end, but left us each going his own way.

They reached Albuquerque, Dyson seeing for the first time the
deceptively clear air and the red desert beneath still snowy peaks.
Feynman bore into town at 70 miles per hour and was immediately
arrested for a rapid sequence of traffic violations. The justice of the peace
announced that the fine he handed down was a personal record. They
parted—Feynman to find Rose McSherry (marriage was impossible, as it
happened, in part because she was determinedly Roman Catholic and he
could not be), Dyson to find a bus back toward Ann Arbor and Schwinger.

Oppenheimer’s Surrender

With Bethe’s blessing Dyson moved to the Institute for Advanced Study in
Princeton in the fall of 1948. Oppenheimer had taken over as director the
year before. Dyson was eager to impress him, and he immediately sensed
he was not alone. “On Wednesday Oppenheimer returns,” he wrote his
parents. “The atmosphere at the Institute during these last days has been
rather like the first scene in ‘Murder in the Cathedral’ with the women of

Canterbury awaiting the return of their archbishop.”

He did not wait for Oppenheimer’s blessing, however, before mailing off
to the Physical Review a manuscript representing a cathartic outpouring of
work during the last days of the summer. He proudly told his parents that
the concentration had nearly killed him. Inspiration came most snappily on
the fifty-hour bus ride east to Princeton, he told colleagues. (When
Oppenheimer heard this he retorted with a sarcastic allusion to the
lightning-from-the-blue legend of Fermat’s last theorem: “There wasn’t
enough room in the margin to write down the proof.”) Dyson had found the
mathematical common ground he was sure must exist. He, too, created
and reshaped terminology to suit his purpose. His chief insight was to
focus on a so-called scattering matrix, or S matrix, a mustering of all the
probabilities associated with the different routes from an initial state to a
given end point. He now advertised “a unified development of the
subject”—more reliable than Feynman and more usable than Schwinger.
His father said that Feynman-Schwinger-Dyson reminded him of a clause
in the Athanasian Creed: “There is the Father incomprehensible, and the
Son incomprehensible, and the Holy Ghost incomprehensible, yet there
are not three incomprehensibles but one incomprehensible.”

It occurred to Dyson that he was rushing into print with accounts of
theories not yet published by their inventors and that the inventors
themselves might take offense. He visited Bethe, temporarily in New York
visiting Columbia, and they took a long walk in Riverside Park as the sun
set over the Hudson River. Bethe warned him that there could be
problems. Dyson said it was Schwinger’s and Feynman’s own fault that
they had not published “any moderately intelligible account”: Schwinger, he
suspected, was polishing obsessively, while Feynman simply couldn’t be
bothered with paperwork. It was irresponsible. They were retarding the
development of science. By publicizing their work Dyson was performing a
service to humanity, he argued. He and Bethe ended up agreeing that
Feynman would not mind but that Schwinger might, and that it would be
poor tactics for an ambitious young physicist to irritate Schwinger. “So the
result of all this,” Dyson wrote his parents,

is that I am reversing the tactics of Mark Antony, and saying very
loud at various points in my paper, “I come to praise Schwinger, not to

bury him.” I only hope he won’t see through it.

Still, he made his judgment clear. The distinctions he drew and the
characterizations he set down soon became the community’s conventional
wisdom: that Schwinger’s and Tomonaga’s approach was the same, while
Feynman’s differed profoundly; and that Feynman’s method was original
and intuitive, while Schwinger’s was formal and laborious.

Dyson well understood that he was reaching out to an audience that
wanted tools. When he showed a Schwinger formula with commutators
threatening to subdivide like branches on a tree and remarked that “their
evaluation gives rise to long and rather difficult analysis,” he knew that his
readers would not suspect him of overstating the difficulty. Ease of use
was the Feynman virtue he stressed. To “write down the matrix elements”
for a certain event, he explained, one need only take a certain set of
products, replace them by sums of matrix elements from another equation,
reassemble the various terms in a certain form, and undertake a certain
type of substitution. Or, he said, one could simply draw a graph.

The simplest Dyson graph.

Graph was the mathematician’s word for a network of points joined by
lines. Dyson showed that there was a graph for every matrix and a matrix
for every graph—the graphs provided a means of cataloging these
otherwise-misplaceable arrays of probabilities. So alien did this conceit
seem that Dyson left it to his readers to draw the graphs in their minds. The
journal editors made room for just one figure. Dyson called the solid lines,
with an implicit direction, electron lines. The directionless dotted lines were
photon lines. Feynman, he mentioned, had something more in mind than
the mere bookkeeping of matrices: “a picture of the physical process.” For

Feynman the points represented the actual creation or annihilation of
particles; the lines represented paths of electrons and photons, not through
a measurable real space but through the history from one quantum event to
another.

Oppenheimer depressed Dyson with a coolness bordering on
animosity. It was the last response he had expected: a defeatist
Oppenheimer, a lethargic Oppenheimer, an Oppenheimer hostile to new
ideas and unwilling to listen. He had been in Europe, where he had
summarized 
international
conferences. It was “Schwinger’s theory” and “Schwinger’s program.”
There were developments “the first largely, the second almost wholly, due
to Schwinger.” In passing, there were “Feynman’s algorithms”—an
exotically disdainful phrase.

the present state of 

theory at 

two 

the 

Dyson decided that there would be no prize for timidity and—still in his
first weeks at the institute—sent Oppenheimer by interoffice mail an
aggressive manifesto. He argued that the new quantum electrodynamics
promised to be more powerful, more self-consistent, and more broadly
applicable than Oppenheimer seemed to think. He did not mince words.

From Mr. F. J. Dyson.
Dear Dr. Oppenheimer:
As I disagree rather strongly with the point of view expressed in your
Solvay Report (not so much with what you say as with what you do not
say) …

I… . I am convinced that the Feynman theory is considerably easier

to use, understand, and teach.

II. Therefore I believe that a correct theory, even if radically different
from our present ideas, will contain more of Feynman than of
Heisenberg-Pauli. …

V. I do not see any reason for supposing the Feynman method to be

less applicable to meson theory than to electrodynamics… .

VI. Whatever the truth of the foregoing assertions may be, we have
now a theory of nuclear fields which can be developed to the point
where it can be compared with experiment, and this is a challenge to
be accepted with enthusiasm.

Enthusiasm was not immediately forthcoming, but Oppenheimer did set up
a series of forums to let Dyson make his case. They became an occasion.
Bethe came down from New York to listen and lend moral support. As the
seminars went on, Oppenheimer was a dramatically nerve-tightening
presence. He interrupted continually, criticizing, jabbing, pouncing on
errors. To Dyson he seemed uncontrollably nervous—always chainsmoking and fidgeting in his chair. Feynman himself was following Dyson’s
progress by long-distance as he continued his own work. Dyson visited
him at Cornell one weekend and watched, amazed, as he rattled off two
new fundamental calculations in a matter of hours. Then Feynman fired off
a hasty letter: “Dear Freeman: I hope you did not go bragging about how
fast I could compute the scattering of light by a potential because on
looking over the calculations last night I discovered the entire effect is zero.
I am sure some smart fellow like Oppenheimer would know such a thing
right off.”

In the end Bethe turned Oppenheimer around. He cast his vote explicitly
with the Feynman theory and let the audience know that he felt Dyson had
more to say. He took Oppenheimer aside privately, and the mood shifted.
By January, the war had been won. At the American Physical Society
meeting Dyson found himself almost as much a hero as Schwinger had
been the year before. Sitting in the audience with Feynman beside him, he
listened as a speaker talked admiringly of “the beautiful theory of
Feynman-Dyson.” Feynman said loudly, “Well, Doc, you’re in.” Dyson had
not even got a doctoral degree. He went on an excited lecture tour and told
his parents that he was a certified big shot. The reward that lasted,
however, was a handwritten note that had appeared in his mailbox in the
dying days of the fall, saying simply, “Nolo contendere. R. O.”

Dyson Graphs, Feynman Diagrams

It was the affair of Case and Slotnick at the same January meeting that
brought home to Feynman the full power of his machinery. He heard a buzz
in the corridor after an early session. Apparently Oppenheimer had
devastated a physicist named Murray Slotnick, who had presented a
paper on meson dynamics. A new set of particles, a new set of fields:

would the new renormalization methods apply? With physicists looking
inward to the higher-energy particles implicated in the forces binding the
nucleus, meson theories were now rising to the fore. The flora and fauna of
meson theories did seem to resemble quantum electrodynamics, but there
were important differences—chief among them: the counterpart of the
photon was the meson, but mesons had mass. Feynman had not learned
any of the language or the special techniques of this fast-growing field.
Experiments were delivering data on the scattering of electrons by
neutrons. Infinities again seemed to plague many plausible theories.
Slotnick investigated two species of theory, one with “pseudoscalar
coupling” and one with “pseudovector coupling.” The first gave finite
answers; the second diverged to infinity.

So Slotnick reported. When he finished Oppenheimer rose and asked,

“What about Case’s theorem?”

Slotnick had never heard of Case’s theorem—and could not have, since
Kenneth Case, a postdoctoral fellow at Oppenheimer’s institute, had not
yet publicized it. As Oppenheimer now revealed, Case’s theorem proved
that the two types of coupling would have to give the same result. Case
was going to demonstrate this the next day. For Slotnick, the assault was
unanswerable.

Feynman had not studied meson theories, but he scrambled for a
briefing and went back to his hotel room to begin calculating. No, the two
couplings were not the same. The next morning he buttonholed Slotnick to
check his answer. Slotnick was nonplussed. He had just spent six intensive
months on this calculation; what was Feynman talking about? Feynman
took out a piece of paper with a formula written on it.

“What’s that Q in there?” Slotnick asked.
Feynman said that was the momentum transfer, a quantity that varied

according to how widely the electron was deflected.

Another shock for Slotnick: here was a complication that he had not
dared to confront in a half-year of work. The special case of no deflection
had been challenge enough.

This was no problem, Feynman said. He set Q equal to zero, simplified
his equation, and found that indeed his night’s work agreed with Slotnick.
He tried not to gloat, but he was afire. He had completed in hours a
superior version of a calculation on which another physicist had staked a

major piece of his career. He knew he now had to publish. He possessed
a crossbow in a world of sticks and clubs.

He went off to Case’s lecture. At the end he leapt up with the question he

had ready: “What about Slotnick’s calculation?”

Schwinger, meanwhile, found the spotlight sliding away. Dyson’s paper
carried a sting—Dyson, who had seemed such an eager student the
summer before. Now this strange wave of Dyson-Feynman publicity. As
Schwinger said later with his incomparably sardonic obliqueness, “There
were visions at large, being proclaimed in a manner somewhat akin to that
of the Apostles, who used Greek logic to bring the Hebrew god to the
Gentiles.”

Feynman now presented his own logic in his own voice. He and Dyson
appeared at a third and last small gathering of physicists, this time at
Oldstone-on-the-Hudson, New York, the final panel of the triptych that had
begun at Shelter Island two years earlier. He published an extended set of
papers—they would stretch over three years and one hundred thousand
words—that defined the start of the modern era for the next generation of
physicists. After his path-integrals paper came, in the Physical Review, “A
Relativistic Cut-Off for Classical Electrodynamics,” “Relativistic Cut-Off for
Quantum Electrodynamics,” “The Theory of Positrons,” “Space-Time
Approach to Quantum Electrodynamics,” “Mathematical Formulation of the
Quantum Theory of Electromagnetic Interaction,” and “An Operator
Calculus Having Applications in Quantum Electrodynamics.” As they
appeared, the younger theorists who devoured them realized that Dyson
had given only a bare summary of Feynman’s vision. They felt invigorated
by his images—beginning with the unforgettable bombardier metaphor in
the positron paper—and by his way of insisting on the plainest statements
of physical principles in physical language:

The rest mass particles have is simply the work done in separating

them against their mutual attraction after they are created… .

How would such a path appear to someone whose future gradually

became past through a moving present? He would first see …

No aspiring physicist could read these papers without thinking about
what space was, what time was, what energy was. Feynman was helping
physics live up to the special promise it made to its devotees: that this
most fundamental of disciplines would bring them face to face with the

primeval questions. Above all, however, to young physicists the diagrams
spoke loudest.

Feynman had told Dyson, with a slight edge, that he had not bothered to
read his papers. “Feynman and I really understand each other,” Dyson
wrote home cheerily. “I know that he is the one person in the world who has
nothing to learn from what I have written; and he doesn’t mind telling me
so.” Feynman’s students, however, sometimes noticed what seemed to
them an undercurrent of anger in the pointed comments he would make
about Dyson. He had started hearing about Dyson’s graphs—irritating.
Why graphs? he asked Dyson. Was that the mathematician in him, putting
on airs?

Feynman’s space-time method had other antecedents besides Dyson’s
graphs, as it happened. A 1943 German textbook by Gregor Wentzel
contained a parallel depiction of a particle exchange process in beta
decay. A Swiss student of Wentzel’s, Ernst Stückelberg, had developed a
diagrammatic approach that even embraced the conception of timereversed positrons; parts of this he published, in French, and parts were
returned as unpublishable. (Wentzel himself was the unimpressed referee.)
Their diagrams showed glimmerings of the style of visualization that
Feynman now brought to fruition. His own full-dress version finally
appeared in a paper he sent off in late spring 1949. “The fundamental
interaction”—an image that would burn itself into the brains of the next
generation of field theorists—showed two electrons interacting by
exchanging a single photon.

A diagram from a little-known 1941 paper of Ernst Stuckelberg, showing aversion of

time reversal in particle trajectories.

He drew electrons as solid lines with arrows. For photons he used wavy
lines without arrows: no directionality needed because the photon’s antiparticle is itself. “The fundamental interaction” reinterpreted the basic
textbook process of electromagnetic repulsion. Two negative charges,
electrons, repel. A standard picture, showing lines of force or merely two
balls pressing apart from each other, would beg the question of how an
entity feels the force of another entity at a distance. It would imply that force
can be transmitted instantly, when in truth, as Feynman’s diagrams
automatically made explicit, whatever carries force can move only as fast
as light. In the case of electromagnetism, it is light—in the form of fugitive
“virtual” particles that flash into existence just long enough to help quantum
theorists balance their books.

These were space-time diagrams, of course, representing time as one
direction on the page. Typically the past sat at the bottom and the future at
the top; one way to read the diagram would be to cover it with a sheet of
paper, pull the paper slowly upward, and watch the history unfold. An
electron changes course as it emits a photon. Another electron changes
course when it absorbs the photon. Yet even the idea that the earlier event
is emission and that the later is absorption represented a prejudice about
time. It was built into the language. Feynman stressed how free his
approach was 
these events are
interchangeable.

customary 

intuitions: 

from 

The Feynman diagram: “The fundam ental interaction.” It is a space-time diagram:
the progress of time is shown upward on the page. If one covers it with a sheet of paper
and then draws the paper slowly upward:

•A pair of electrons-their paths shown as solid lines-move toward each other.

•When (6) is reached , a virtual photon is emitted by the right-hand electron (wiggly

line), and the electron is deflected outward.

•At (5) the photon is reabsorbed by the other electron , and it, too, is deflected

outward.

Thus this diagram depicts the ordinary force of repulsion between two
electrons as a force carried by a quantum of light. Because it is a virtual
particle, coming into existence for a mere ghostly instant, it can temporarily
violate the laws that govern the system as a whole—the exclusion principle
or the conservation of energy, for example. And Feynman noted that it is
arbitrary to think of the photon as being emitted in one place and absorbed
in the other: one can say just as correctly that it is emitted at (5), travels
backward in time, and is then (earlier) absorbed at (6).

The diagram is an aid to visualization. But it serves physicists mainly as
a bookkeeping device. Each diagram is associated with a complex
number, an amplitude that is squared to produce a probability for the
process shown.

to 

In fact each diagram represented not a particular path, with specified
times and places, but a sum of all such paths. There were other simple
diagrams. He represented the self-energy of an electron—its interaction
with itself—by showing a photon line returning to the same electron that
it. There was a grammar of permissible diagrams,
spawned 
corresponding, as Dyson had emphasized, 
the permissible
mathematical operations. Still, the diagrams could grow arbitrarily
complicated, virtual particles appearing and disappearing in an intricate,
recursive mesh. Feynman’s first H-shaped diagram for interacting
electrons was the only such diagram with one virtual photon. Drawing all
the possible diagrams with two virtual photons showed how quickly the
permutations grew. Each made a contribution to the final computation, and
more complicated diagrams became enormously difficult to calculate.
Fortunately the greater the complication the less the probability and the
smaller, therefore, the effect on the answer. Even so, physicists would
shortly find themselves agonizing over pages of diagrams resembling
catalogs of knots. They found it was worth the effort; each diagram could
replace an effective lifetime of Schwingerian algebra.

Self-interaction. It is necessary to sum the amplitudes corresponding tomany
Feynman diagrams to add the contributions for every way an event can occur. The
continual possibility of virtual particles materializing and vanishing causes increasing
complexity. Here an electron interacts with itself, in effect- the self-energy problem that
first troubled Feynman in his work with Wheeler. It emits and absorbs its own virtual
photon.

Feynman diagrams seemed to depict particles, and they had sprung from
a mind focused on a particle-centered style of visualization, but the theory
they anchored—quantum field theory—gave center stage to the field. In a
sense the paths of the diagrams, and the paths summed in the path
integrals, were the paths of the field itself. Feynman read the Physical
Review more avidly than ever in the past, watching for citations. For a while
it was all Schwinger—a paper would be pages of glyphs and would
culminate in a neat expression that Feynman felt he could simply have
written down as a starting point. He was sure this could not last. It did not.
Feynman’s method, Feynman’s rules, began to take over. In the summer of
1950 a paper appeared with small “Feynman diagrams” on the first page
—“following the simplified methods introduced by Feynman.” A month later
came another: “a technique due to Feynman… . The calculation of matrix
elements can be simplified greatly by use of the Feynman-Dyson
methods.” The unreasonable power of the diagrams in the hands of
students frustrated some of the elders, who felt that physicists were waving
a sword that they did not understand. As the flood of papers began to cite
Feynman, Schwinger went into what he described as his retreat. “Like the
silicon chip of more recent years, the Feynman diagram was bringing
computation to the masses,” he said. Later, people who overlooked the
note of hoi polloi quoted this remark as though Schwinger had intended a
tribute. He had not. This was “pedagogy, not physics.”

Yes, one can analyze experience into individual pieces of
topology. But eventually one has to put it all together again. And then
the piecemeal approach loses some of its attraction.

Making the increasingly precise calculations for which quantum electrodynamics

became famous requi red formidable exercises in combinatorics.

Schwinger’s students at Harvard were put at a competitive
disadvantage, or so it seemed to their fellows elsewhere, who suspected
them of surreptitiously using the diagrams anyway. This was sometimes
true. (They revered him, though—his night-owl ways, his Cadillac, his
theatrically impeccable lecture performances. They emulated his way of
saying, “We can effectively regard …” and they tried to construct the
perfect Schwinger sentence: one graduate student, Jeremy Bernstein,
liked a prototype that began, “Although ‘one’ is not perfectly ‘zero,’ we can
effectively regard …” They also worried about Schwinger’s ability to
materialize silently beside them at the lunch table; a group of his graduate
students protected themselves with a conversational convention in which

Schwinger meant Feynman and Feynman meant Schwinger.)

Murray Gell-Mann later spent a semester staying in Schwinger’s house
in Cambridge and loved to say afterward that he had searched everywhere
for the Feynman diagrams. He had not found any, but one room had been
locked …

Away to a Fabulous Land

Bethe worried that Feynman was growing restless after four years at
Cornell. There were entanglements with women: Feynman pursued them
and dropped them, or tried to, with increasingly public frustration—so it
seemed even to undergraduates, who knew him as the least professorial
of professors, likely to be found beating a rhythm on a dormitory bench or
lying supine and greasy beneath his Oldsmobile. He had never settled into
any house or apartment. One year he lived as faculty guest in a student
residence. Often he would stay nights or weeks with married friends until
these arrangements became sexually volatile. He seemed to think that
Cornell was alternately too large and too small—an isolated village with
only a diffuse interest in science outside the confines of its physics
department. Furthermore, Hans Bethe would always be the great man of
physics at Cornell.

An old Los Alamos acquaintance, Robert Bacher, after serving on the
new Atomic Energy Commission, was moving to Caltech, where he was
charged with rebuilding an obsolete-looking physics program. He was
swimming in a lake during a summer vacation in northern Michigan when
Feynman’s name came into his head. He rushed back to shore, tracked
Feynman down by telephone, and within a few days had him there visiting.
Feynman agreed to consider Pasadena, but he was also thinking about
possibilities even more faraway, exotic, and warm. South America was on
his mind. He had gone so far as to study Spanish. Pan American Airways
had opened the continent to American tourists on a large scale, jumping
from New York to Rio de Janeiro in thirty-four hours for roughly the price of
the fortnight-long ocean voyage, and the popular magazines were filling
with sensual images: palms and plantations, hot beaches and gaudy
nights. Carmen Miranda and bananas still dominated the travel writing.

There was a new note, too, of the apocalyptic fear that had dogged
Feynman: the Soviet Union had demonstrated its first working atomic
bomb in September 1949, and worries about nuclear war were entering
the national consciousness and spurring a panicky civil defense
movement. Emigrations to South America became an odd symptom. One
of Feynman’s girlfriends told him seriously that he might be safer there.
John Wheeler said—by way of imploring Feynman to join work on a
thermonuclear bomb—that he was estimating “at least a 40 percent
chance of war by September.”

When a Brazilian physicist visiting Princeton, Jayme Tiomno, heard that
Feynman was flirting with Spanish, he had suggested a switch to
Portuguese and invited him to visit the new Centro Brasiliero de
Pesquisas Físicas in Rio for several weeks in the summer of 1949.
Feynman accepted, applied for a passport, and left the continental United
States for the first time. He did learn enough Portuguese to teach
physicists and beseech women in their native language. (By the end of the
summer he had persuaded one of them, a Copacabana resident named
Clotilde, who called him meu Ricardinho in her mellifluous Portuguese, to
come live with him in Ithaca—briefly.) Late the next winter he impulsively
asked the centro to hire him permanently. Meanwhile he was negotiating
seriously with Bacher. He had endured one too many days kneeling in cold
slush as he tried to wrap chains around his tires. Caltech appealed to him.
It reminded him of the other Tech, such a pure haven for the technically
minded. Four years at a liberal-arts university had not softened his outlook.
He was tired of “all the ins and outs of the small town and the bad weather,”
he wrote Bacher, and added, “The theoretical broadening which comes
from having many humanities subjects on the campus is offset by the
general dopiness of the people who study these things and by the
Department of Home Economics.” He warned Bacher about one of his
weaknesses: he did not like having graduate students. At Cornell “poor
Bethe” had ended up covering for him again and again.

I do not like to suggest a problem and suggest a method for its
solution and feel responsible after the student is unable to work out the
problem by the suggested method by the time his wife is going to
have a baby so that he cannot get a job. What happens is that I find

that I do not suggest any method that I do not know will work and the
only way I know it works is by having tried it out at home previously, so
I find the old saying that “A Ph.D. thesis is research done by a
professor under particularly trying circumstances” is for me the dead
truth.

He had a sabbatical year coming. He was going to make his escape, one
way or another.

Once (and it was not yesterday), a diligent student of field theory wrote
later at Niels Bohr’s institute in Copenhagen, there lived a very young
mole and a very young crow who, having heard of the fabulous land
called Quefithe, decided to visit it. Before starting out, they went to the
wise owl and asked what Quefithe was like.

Owl’s description of Quefithe was quite confusing. He said that in
Quefithe everything was both up and down. Physicists need more than
ideas and methods. They need a version of history, too, a narrative cabinet
for ordering their bits of knowledge. So they create a legend of search and
discovery on the fly; they turn hearsay and supposition into instant lore.
They discover that it is hard to teach a pure concept without clothing it in at
least a fragment of narrative: who discovered it; what problem needed
solving; what path led from not knowing to knowing. Some physicists learn
that there is such a thing as physicists’ history, necessary and convenient
but often different from real history. The fable of Quefithe—“quantum field
theory”—with a Schwinger mole and a Feynman crow, an owl resembling
Bohr, and a fox like Dyson, lovingly satirized a story that had entered the
community’s store of self-knowledge as rapidly as the path integrals and
Feynman diagrams: If you knew where you were, there was no way of
knowing where you were going and conversely, if you knew where you
were going, there was no way of knowing where you were… .

Clearly, if they were ever going to learn anything about Quefithe, they

had to see it for themselves. And that is what they did.

After a few years had passed, the mole came back. He said that
Quefithe consisted of lots of tunnels. One entered a hole and wandered
through a maze, tunnels splitting and rejoining, until one found the next
hole and got out. Quefithe sounded like a place only a mole would like,

and nobody wanted to hear more about it.

Not much later the crow landed, flapping its wings and crowing
excitedly. Quefithe was amazing, it said. The most beautiful landscape
with high mountains, perilous passes and deep valleys. The valley floors
were teeming with little moles who were scurrying down rutted paths. The
crow sounded like he had taken too many bubble baths, and many who
heard him shook their heads. The frogs kept on croaking “It is not
rigorous, it is not rigorous!” … But there was something about crow’s
enthusiasm that was infectious.

The most puzzling thing about it all was that the mole’s description of
Quefithe sounded nothing like the crow’s description. Some even
doubted that the mole and the crow had ever gotten to the mythical land.
Only the fox, who was by nature very curious, kept running back and forth
between the mole and the crow and asking questions, until he was sure
that he understood them both. Nowadays, anybody can get to
Quefithe—even snails.

CALTECH

The California Institute of Technology had entered the 1920s with an
engineering building, a physics building, a chemistry laboratory, an
auditorium, and an orange grove on a dusty, underirrigated thirty acres a
few minutes east of the thriving civic center of Pasadena, a town of new
money in search of monuments. The scent of orange and rose floated from
the gardens of porticoed homes often described as mansions, built in a
relaxed Spanish and Italianate style that was coming to be thought of as
Californian. Walls were a pale stucco, roofs a red tile. “Pasadena is ten
miles from Los Angeles as the Rolls-Royces fly,” one commentator said in
1932. “It is one of the prettiest towns in America, and probably the richest.”
Albert Einstein wintered there for three years, posing for pictures on a
bicycle to the delight of the institute administrators, attending, as Will
Rogers said, “every luncheon, every dinner, every movie opening, every
marriage and two-thirds of the divorces,” before he finally decided
Princeton suited him better. Even as the Depression began to reverse
Pasadena’s fortunes, Caltech’s rose on every new tide in science. A new
Caltech laboratory polished the giant lens for the great telescope under
way at Palomar Mountain. Caltech made itself the American center of
systematic earthquake science; one of its young graduates, Charles
Richter, devised the ubiquitous measurement scale that carries his name.
The school moved quickly into aeronautic science, and a group of
enthusiastic amateurs firing off rockets in the hills about the Rose Bowl
became, by 1944, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Foundations and
industrialists were eager to look beyond their usual East Coast funding
targets. A cornflakes manufacturer paid for a building that became the
Kellogg Radiation Laboratory, and its reigning expert, Charles Lauritsen,
made it a national center for fundamental nuclear physics. Lauritsen spent
much of the thirties investigating the nuclear properties of the light
elements—hydrogen and deuterium, helium, lithium, up through carbon and
beyond—filling in details of energy levels and spin with a patched-together
arsenal of equipment.

He was still working in Kellogg in the winter of 1951, when oracular
messages started coming in by ham radio. A blind operator in Brazil would
establish a link every week or so with a student at Caltech. Lauritsen would
receive terse predictions: Could it be that nitrogen has two levels very
close together at the lowest state, not just a single level? He would check
these, and often they would prove correct. His Brazilian informant
apparently had a theory …

In Chicago, Fermi, too, heard from Feynman—a long “Dear Fermi” letter
just before Christmas from the Miramar Palace Hotel in Copacabana.
Feynman, following the thread he had picked up in the episode of Case v.
Slotnick, was working on meson theory. It was messy—divergences
everywhere—but he had reached a hodgepodge of conclusions. “I should
like to make some comments at the risk of saying what is obvious to
everybody in the U.S.,” he wrote Fermi. Mesons are pseudoscalar …
Yukawa’s theory is wrong. He had heard some experimental news via the
ham-radio link—“I am not entirely in the dark in Brazil.” He had some
predictions that he wanted checked. His approach to these particles, so
essential to the binding of the atomic nucleus, centered increasingly on an
even more abstract variant of spin: yet another quantum number called
isotopic spin. So did Fermi’s approach, as it turned out. Feynman was
duplicating some of the Chicago work. In their ways they were trying to
take the measure of a theory that resembled quantum electrodynamics yet
resisted the lion tamers’ favorite whips, renormalization, perturbation
theory. “Don’t believe any calculation in meson theory which uses a
Feynman diagram!” Feynman wrote Fermi. Meanwhile, as they pushed
more energetically inside the atom, they were watching the breakup of the
prewar particle picture. With each new particle, the dream of a
manageable number of building blocks 
this continually
subdividing world, what was truly elementary?

faded. 

In 

What was made of what? “Principles,” Feynman had written in the tiny
address book he carried with him. “You can’t say A is made of B or vice
versa. All mass is interaction.” That did not solve the problem, though.
Cloud chamber photographs showed new kinds of forks and kinks in the
trajectories—new mesons, it seemed, before anyone had understood the
old. Fermi set the tone for the coming proliferation of particles with a
declaration in the Physical Review.

In recent years several new particles have been discovered which
are currently assumed to be “elementary,” that is, essentially
structureless. The probability that all such particles should be really
elementary becomes less and less as their number increases.

It is by no means certain that nucleons, mesons, electrons, neutrinos

are all elementary particles… .

Feynman had made his escape shortly after arriving in Pasadena. He
accepted Caltech’s offer of an immediate sabbatical year and fled to the
most exotic place he could find. The State Department subsidized his
salary. For the first time since Far Rockaway he could spend days at the
beach, where he looked over the crowds in sandals and bathing suits and
gazed at the endless waves and sky. He had never before seen a beach
where mountains loomed just behind. At night the Serra da Carioca were
black humps in the moonlight. Royal palms like dressed-up telephone
poles—taller by far than the palms of Pasadena—lined the coast and the
broad avenues of Rio. Feynman went down to the sea for inspiration.
Fermi teased him: “I wish I could also refresh my ideas by swimming off
Copacabana.” Feynman liked the idea of helping build a new seat of
physics at the Centro Brasiliero de Pesquisas Físicas. Fifteen years
before, physics had hardly existed in Brazil or elsewhere in South America.
A few lesser German and Italian physicists had grafted branches in the
middle 1930s, and within a decade their students’ students were creating
new facilities with the support of industry and government agencies.

Feynman taught basic electromagnetism to students at the University of
Brazil in Rio, who disappointed him by meekly refusing to ask questions.
Their style seemed rote and hidebound after freewheeling Americans.
European influence had dominated the construction of a curriculum. The
nascent graduate programs did not have the luxury of a liberal mix of
confident instructors. Memorization replaced understanding, or so it
seemed to Feynman, and he began to proselytize the Brazilian educational
establishment. Students learned names and abstract formulations, he said.
Brazilian students could recite Brewster’s Law: “Light impinging on a
index n is 100 percent polarized with the electric field
material of 
perpendicular to the plane of incidence if the tangent …” But when he

asked what would happen if they looked out at the sunlight reflecting off the
bay and held up a piece of polarized film and turned the film this way and
that, he got blank stares. They could define “triboluminescence”—light
emitted by crystals under mechanical pressure—and it made Feynman
wish the professors would just send them into a dark room with a pair of
pliers and a sugar cube or a Life Saver to see the faint blue flash, as he
had when he was a child. “Have you got science? No! You have only told
what a word means in terms of other words. You haven’t told them anything
about nature—what crystals produce light when you crush them, why they
produce light… .” An examination question would read, “What are the four
types of telescope?” (Newtonian, Cassegrainian, …) Students could
answer, and yet, Feynman said, the real telescope was lost: the instrument
that helped begin the scientific revolution, that showed humanity the
humbling vastness of the stars.

Words about words: Feynman despised this kind of knowledge more
intently than ever, and when he returned to the United States he found out
again how much it was a part of American education, a mind-set showing
itself not just in the habits of students but in quiz shows, popular whatshould-you-know books, and textbook design. He wanted everyone to
share his strenuous approach to knowledge. He would sit idly at a café
table and cock his ear to listen to the sound sugar made as it struck the
surface of his iced tea, something between a hiss and a rustle, and his
temper would flare if anyone asked what the phenomenon was called—
even if someone merely asked for an explanation. He respected only the
not-knowing, first-principles approach: try sugar in water, try sugar in warm
tea, try tea already saturated with sugar, try salt … see when the whoosh
becomes a fizz. Trial and error, discovery, free inquiry.

He resented more than just the hollowness of standardized knowledge.
Rote learning drained away all that he valued in science: the inventive soul,
the habit of seeking better ways to do anything. His kind of knowledge—
knowledge by doing—“gives a feeling of stability and reality about the
world,” he said, “and drives out many fears and superstitions.” He was
thinking now about what science meant and what knowledge meant. He
told the Brazilians:

Science is a way to teach how something gets to be known, what

is not known, to what extent things are known (for nothing is known
absolutely), how to handle doubt and uncertainty, what the rules of
evidence are, how to think about things so that judgments can be
made, how to distinguish truth from fraud, and from show.

Telescopes, Newtonian or Cassegrainian, had flaws and limitations to go
with their wondrous history. An effective scientist—even a theorist—
needed to know about both.

Faker from Copacabana

Feynman told people that he had been born tone-deaf and that he disliked
most music, despite the conventional observation that mathematical and
musical aptitude run side by side. Classical music—music in the European
tradition—he found not just dull but positively unpleasant. Above all it was
the experience of listening that he could not stand.

Those who worked near him over the years knew nevertheless about the
toneless music that seemed constantly to well up through his nerve
endings, that clattered and pounded through their shared office walls. He
drummed unconsciously as he calculated, and he drummed to attract a
crowd at parties. Philip Morrison, who shared an office with him at Cornell,
would say half seriously that Feynman was drawn to drumming because it
was a noisy, staccato activity, because he had long fingers, and because it
went with being a magician. But Morrison also noticed how freakish
Western classical music had become by the twentieth century in one
respect: of all the world’s musical traditions, the West’s had most
decisively cast out improvisation. In Bach’s era mastery of the keyboard
still meant combining composer, performer, and improviser in one person.
Even a century later, performers felt free to experiment with improvising
cadenzas mid-concerto, and Franz Liszt toward the end of the nineteenth
century gave concertgoers a taste of the athletic thrill of hearing music
made up on the spot as fast as a pianist could play, hearing impromptu
variations and embellishments along with the false steps and blind alleys
from which the performer-composer would have to extricate himself like
Houdini. Improvisation meant audible risk and wrong notes. In modern

practice an orchestra or string quartet that plays a half-dozen wrong notes
in an hour is judged incompetent.

Having resisted the MIT version of Western culture for engineers, having
rejected the liberal arts version of culture at Cornell, Feynman finally began
his own process of acculturation in Brazil. Travel for most Americans,
physicists included, still began with the capitals of Europe, where Feynman
never ventured until he was thirty-two and a conference brought him to
Paris. In the streets of Rio he discovered a taste for the Third World and
especially for the music, the slang, and the art that was not codified in
books or taught in school—at least not American schools. For the rest of
his life he preferred traveling to Latin American and Asia. He soon
became one of the first American physicists to tour Japan and there, too,
headed quickly for the countryside.

In Rio Feynman found a living musical tradition—rhythm-centered,
improvisational, and hotly dynamic. The word samba was nowhere to be
found in his Encyclopaedia Britannica, but the sound rattled through his
windows high above the beach, all brass, bells, and percussion. Brazilian
samba was an African-Latin slum-and-ballroom hybrid, played in the
streets and nightclubs by members of clubs facetiously called “schools.”
Feynman became a sambista. He joined a local school, Os Farçantes de
Copacabana, or, roughly, the Copacabana Burlesquers—though Feynman
preferred to translate farçantes as “fakers.” There were trumpets and
ukuleles, rasps and shakers, snare drums and bass drums. He tried the
pandeiro, a tambourine that was played with the precision and variety of a
drum, and he settled on the frigideira, a metal plate that sent a light, fast
tinkle in and around the main samba rhythms, the mood shifting from
explosive abstract jazz to shameless pop schmaltz. At first he had trouble
mastering the fluid wrist torques of the local players, but eventually he
showed enough competence to win assignments on paid private jobs. He
thought he played with a foreign accent that the other musicians found
esoteric and charming. He played in beach contests and impromptu trafficstopping street parades. The climactic event in the yearly samba calendar
was Rio’s carneval in February, the raucous flesh-celebrating festival that
fills the nighttime streets with Cariocas half naked or in costume. In the
1952 carneval, amid the crepe paper and outsized jewelry, with revelers

hanging from streetcars whose bells regurgitated the samba beat, a
photographer for a local version of Paris Match snapped a carousing
American physicist dressed as Mephistopheles.

As hard as he threw himself into life in Rio, he was lonely there. His hamradio link was not enough to keep in touch with the fast-changing edge of
postwar physics. He heard from hardly anyone, not even Bethe. That winter
he drank heavily—enough to frighten himself one day into swearing off
alcohol one more time, for good—and picked up women on the beach or
in nightclubs. He haunted the Miramar Hotel’s outdoor patio bar, where he
socialized with an ever-changing group of expatriate Americans and
Englishmen. He took out Pan American stewardesses, who stayed on the
Miramar’s fourth floor between flights. And in an act of rash abandon he
proposed marriage, by mail, to a woman he had dated at Cornell.

Alas, the Love of Women!

The popular anthropologist Margaret Mead had recently reported what so
many popular magazines were already noticing: that the courtship rituals of
American culture were 
ferment. Mead examined billboard
advertisements and motion-picture plots and declared, “The old certainties
of the past are gone, and everywhere there are signs of an attempt to build
a new tradition …”

in 

In every pair of lovers the two are likely to find themselves
wondering what the next steps are in a ballet between the sexes that
no longer follows traditional lines, a ballet in which each couple must
make up their steps as they go along. When he is insistent, should she
yield, and how much? When she is demanding, should he resist, and
how firmly?

Sometimes Feynman looked at his own mating habits with a similar
detachment. Since Arline’s death he had pursued women with a singlemindedness that violated most of the public, if not the private, scruples
associated with the sexual ballet. He dated undergraduates, paid
prostitutes in whorehouses, taught himself (as he saw it) how to beat bar

girls at their own game, and slept with the young wives of several of his
friends among the physics graduate students. He told colleagues that he
had worked out a kind of all’s-fair approach to sexual morality and argued
that he was using women as they sought to use him. Love seemed mostly
a myth—a species of self-delusion, or rationalization, or a gambit
employed by women in search of husbands. What he had felt with Arline he
seemed to have placed on a shelf out of the way.

Women told him that they loved him for his mind, for his looks, for the
way he danced, for the way he did try to listen to them and understand
them. They loved the company of his intellectual friends. They understood
that work came first with him, and they loved that about him, although Rose
McSherry, the New Mexican woman he courted intensely by mail at the
height of his work on quantum electrodynamics, resented it when he
returned from the Pocono conference and wrote her that work would
always be his “first love.” She would never marry a man to slave for him,
she said. Sometimes she worried that he thought of women as mere
recreation. She wished she could feel that he did his work because of her
and for her. So many women wanted to be his muse.

The changing rules caught Feynman’s lovers in a bind. The language of
illicit sex relied on awkward euphemisms and old-fashioned labels,
spooning and jilting, heels and tramps, defining their roles and leaving
them at a disadvantage. In his first summer at Cornell, a woman he had
met in Schenectady let him know as indirectly as possible that she was
pregnant and then that the pregnancy was over. “I have been quite
indisposed—something unusual for me—but I think you have undoubtedly
guessed the reason.” As she wrote, she knew that he was renewing a fling
with his “Rose of Sharon.” She knew she was supposed to hate him, but
she preferred not to think of men as “heels.” She assured him that she was
not “in love.”

I almost envy you the wonderful and supreme happiness that you
must have enjoyed before your wife passed away. Such happiness
comes to so few people—I wonder—can it happen twice in one’s
lifetime?

She did offer him a warning, saying sarcastically that she was sure he

would recognize a bit of Byron:

Alas, the love of women! it is known
 To be a lovely and a fearful thing; …
 And their revenge is as the tiger’s spring,
Deadly, and quick, and crushing; yet, as real
 Torture is theirs—what they inflict they feel.
They are right; for man, to man so oft unjust,
 Is always so to women …

In a postscript, she corrected his spelling of her name.

Women were expected to contend in the work force—another trend
accelerated by the war—but they also stood in the centerpiece of a cozy
domestic vision of family life. The professions, and particularly the
sciences, remained in the rear guard. The new Physics Today summed up
the difficulties from the sober perspective of someone who had spent more
than a decade teaching physics to undergraduates at Bryn Mawr, where a
local ditty asked,

Tell me what it is like to be teaching these girls?
Do you find that they have any brains?
Do they take themselves seriously (may I ask) or do you?

The editors were determined to keep the tone lighthearted. The author
argued, not without sympathy, that the single most grievous obstacle to the
success of women as physicists was their own “tendency to defer to the
superior male.” Meanwhile employers continued to assume that women’s
eventual priority would be marriage and children. In the Physical Review
women almost never appeared as authors.

In their wholly male world, physicists were even less likely than other
their sexual
American men to look for intellectual partnership 
relationships. Some did, nevertheless. In the European tradition, where the
professoriat implied a certain social class and cultural grounding, wives
had tended to share their husbands’ class and culture: Hans Bethe married
the daughter of a theoretical physicist. In the American social stew, where
science had become an upward pathway for children of the immigrant

in 

poor, whatever husbands and wives might be assumed to share, it was not
necessarily a background in the academy. Feynman, alone anyway in the
distant reaches of much of his work, seemed to date only women of
obvious beauty, often blondes, sometimes heavily made-up and
provocatively dressed—or so it seemed to some of the women he did not
date. He hardly seemed interested in professional companionship from the
women he chased, try though they might to offer it. “I’m learning more
everyday about physics and realizing that there is just reams more to
learn,” one of his lovers wrote. “Somehow the field of physics has a fatal
fascination for me.” She suspected, though, that he had already moved on
to someone else. She and all her successors shared an unforgivable
handicap, and some of them guessed it: They were not Arline Greenbaum,
Feynman’s Juliet, the one perfect love, the girl who had died before the
mundane, domestic, day-today, year-to-year realities of ordinary life could
have time to add a tempering color and tone to the romantic ideal.

Every so often Feynman would feel the urge to bring a measure of
rationality to his relations with women. He loved to work out the rules, to
find the systems. He tired of the susurrus of promises, flattery, cajoling. He
hated having to apologize. He turned Arline’s favorite principle to a new
purpose: “It seems to me that you go to lots of trouble to be sure the girl
doesn’t think ill of you,” he wrote in a note to himself after one emotionally
messy encounter.

WHAT DO YOU CARE WHAT SHE THINKS? It is all right to care whether
you hurt her or not—just do your best, (if you insist) on trying not to—
then if the fact is that you are O.K., don’t bother to try to argue
otherwise or try to get her to tell you you are wonderful… . Further, if
you are selfish & look only to your physical pleasure—don’t try to
convince yourself otherwise—or rather—don’t try to explain it to her or
convince her otherwise.

In his favorite bar story he gradually deduces the procedural machinery of a
bar: women flirt with the customers, the customers buy them drinks, the
women move on. “How is it possible,” he would say, “that an intelligent guy
can be such a goddamn fool when he gets into a bar?” He is such a
neophyte in a bar, such a naïve outside-the-experience anthropologist, that

even his education in how to order a Black and White with water on the
side holds interest. He watches as bar girls goad him to buy champagne
cocktails. In retaliation he learns a new set of procedures. The main rule is
to treat the women with disrespect. It is psychological warfare. “You are
worse than a whore,” he tells someone whom he has bought sandwiches
and coffee for $1.10. His reward: she sleeps with him and repays him for
the sandwiches, too. All’s fair.

Feynman told these very stories to the women he dated. Despite their
too-good-to-be-true quality, they were convincing and funny. No one ever
caught him in a lie. Like many people who discover that storytelling is a
talent—that they can hold an audience, focus a roomful of eyes—he honed
his repertoire, never caring whether the crowd included people who had
heard a story before. Nor, mostly, did they care. With his stories, his
laughter, his dancing, his ability when alone with another person to
concentrate his attention absolutely, he was intensely attractive to women.
This despite the central coldness he held so close—this noetic Casanova.
They suffered, sometimes, enormous pain. A second woman told him
euphemistically that she had had an abortion: “The whole thing is horrible,
cruel and wretched, and happens about once in two million… . I’m sure you
never dreamt that any harm would come of such a sudden urge (shall we
say, the ‘shortest part’ of an urge) but as I mentioned before the innocent
have to pay, etc. etc.” Later she asked him to forgive the mean things she
had said.

They almost always did forgive him. They loved to recite his virtues. A

catalog that one woman set down on paper:

1. Handsome (could be)
2. clever (he thinks)
3. tall (very)
4. well dressed (trim)
5. a dancer (From a whore in Mexico City)
6. a drummer (whow!)
7. personality plus (oh boy!)
8. smart (putting it mild)
9. conversation (good)
10. sweet (sometimes)

On professional trips overseas he seduced women so regularly that his
hosts knew he expected them to make introductions. In London he would
meet Pauline or Betty, in Paris Isabelle or Marina, in Amsterdam Marika or
Genny. He would see a woman for days and then file her farewell letter with
the others:

My love for you is so great that I’m sure it would have brought us
both a wealth of happiness … please always remember, when in the
evening of your life … that somewhere in the world there is me and
that I love you. For I shall always remember you because you are the
only person that I have felt at complete ease and sympathy with.

There were so many attitudes a woman could assume for a short-term love
affair. His lovers would warn him jovially not to break too many hearts, or
they would wish him luck with all his projects “be they blonde or
mathematical—or physical!” They would hint that they might appear on his
doorstep—that his “sorcière” might not know the way to the moon and
stars but could find the USA—or implore, “concerning your work hurry up to
find an atomic broom which could fly from Europe to California in a couple
of hours.” They would accuse him of preferring his own company—of a
“Narcissus-of-the-mind complex.” They would wonder aloud what home
really meant to him—was he not a little lonely, after all?

He was. His friends refused to understand why he finally chose to settle
down with Mary Louise Bell of Neodesha, Kansas, who had met him in a
Cornell cafeteria and pursued him—they said cattily—all the way to
Pasadena and finally accepted his proposal by mail from Rio de Janeiro.
They considered her a platinum blonde (“the girl with the cellophane hair”
was one unkind nickname that floated behind Feynman’s back) who wore
white high heels and tight white shorts to picnics. They thought she was
older than he was (the age difference was actually just a few months). Even
before they married, they quarreled by mail about how much they should
spend on interior furnishings and how he looked in old clothes. She made
clear that she did not usually think scientists were much fun. She had
studied the history of Mexican art and textiles—that was exotic enough to
interest him. While he was in Brazil, she taught courses at Michigan State
University in the History of Furniture and Institutional Interiors, mainly to

men pursuing careers in hotel or restaurant management. “The pattern is
that the girl who teaches this course usually marries one of those
characters,” she told him.

They married as soon as he returned from Brazil, in June 1952, and they
honeymooned in Mexico and Guatemala, where they ran up and down
Mayan pyramids. He made her laugh, but he also frightened her with what
she decided was a violent temper. She did not know what to think when,
riding down a Mexican highway, she complained that the car’s sun flap
was annoying her, and he pulled out a screwdriver and repaired it, with
both hands off the wheel. She gave his friends the impression that she did
not altogether appreciate him. She wanted him to dress better; they
discovered that they could tell whether she was near by looking to see
whether he was wearing a necktie. She nagged him, they thought. She
liked to tell people that he was not “evolved” to the point of appreciating
music and that sometimes she thought she was married to an uneducated
man with a Ph.D.

They moved from Feynman’s bungalow apartment near campus to a
larger place in Altadena, just across Pasadena’s northern border. She
resisted socializing with other physicists. Once he missed a chance to
catch Niels Bohr while he was in Pasadena briefly; as he and Mary Lou
were sitting down to dinner, she said that she probably should have told
him, but someone had invited them over that evening to see an old bore.
Politically she was an extreme conservative, unlike most of Feynman’s
colleagues, and as the Oppenheimer security hearings began, she irritated
Feynman by saying, “Where there’s smoke there’s fire.” He, too, voted
Republican, at least for a while. Divorce was inevitable—Feynman realized
early that they should not have children, he confided in his sister—but it
was nearly four years before they finally separated.

By agreement he confessed to Extreme Cruelty—

has wilfully, wrongfully, and without provocation, justification or
excuse whatsoever inflicted grievous physical and mental suffering …
; plaintiff has suffered great physical pain and grievous mental
suffering, and has suffered physical nervous shock to the extent that
further married life between plaintiff and defendant has been rendered
impossible.

He agreed to a circumscribed alimony, a total of ten thousand dollars over
the next three years. She kept their 1950 Oldsmobile and all their
household furniture. He kept their 1951 Lincoln Cosmopolitan, his scientific
books, “All Drums and Percussion Instruments,” and a set of dishes that
his mother had given him. The divorce had a fleeting life in the national
press—not because Feynman was a celebrity, but because columnists
and cartoonists could not overlook the nature of the extreme cruelty: Prof
Plays Bongos, Does Calculus in Bed. “The drums made terrific noise,” his
wife had testified. And: “He begins working calculus problems in his head
as soon as he awakens… . He did calculus while driving his car, while
sitting in the living room and while lying in bed at night.”

One day near Thanksgiving 1954, as Southern California’s winter
neared with no discernible change of season, the smog had rolled up from
Los Angeles toward the northern hills that cradled Pasadena, and for a
moment their shared discontents had become too much. Feynman wrote
to Bethe begging for his old job back. His eyes smarted from the smog;
Mary Lou was complaining that she could not see the beautiful colors of the
trees. He said he would take any salary—he surrendered unconditionally.

Soon afterward, someone rushed up to him with news of a discovery by
Walter Baade, an astronomer at Mount Wilson Observatory up in the San
Gabriel Mountains, demonstrating that the stars of the distant universe
were several times older than anyone had established before. Caltech in
the fifties was becoming an international center of cosmological discovery.
The same day, a young microbiologist told him of a discovery he had
made, confirming the fundamental irreducibility of the DNA molecule as
bacteria divide and divide again. With Linus Pauling and Max Delbrück on
hand, Caltech had some of the leading lights of molecular genetics as the
field was undergoing its sensational birth. Meanwhile, although Bethe had
been thrilled by Feynman’s letter, he had to tell him that the most Cornell
could offer on the spot was a temporary appointment.

Feynman changed his mind again. That same fall, Enrico Fermi died,
and the University of Chicago decided to do whatever was necessary to
hire Feynman. Its dean of the Division of Physical Sciences, Walter Bartky,
and a younger physicist, Marvin Goldberger, later to become president of
Caltech, traveled westward on the Super Chief—Bartky was afraid to fly—

and took a taxi directly from the railway station to Feynman’s house. He
refused to consider their proposition, and he begged them not even to tell
him how much money they were offering. He was worried, he said, that
Mary Lou would hear the amount and insist on moving. He had decided.
He was going to stay at Caltech.

Onward with Physics

Where next, in the newly illuminated quantum world?

Feynman had reached maturity at a moment when the community of
theoretical physicists shared a great unsolved problem, such a weighty
knot that the enterprise could scarcely move forward until it was untied or
cut. Now that quantum electrodynamics had been solved, no single
problem seemed as universally compelling. Most theoretical physicists
turned convoy fashion toward the smaller atomic distances and smaller
time scales at which new particles appeared. They were driven in part by
the logic of the past century’s history: each new step inward toward the
atom’s core had brought not just new revelations but also a new
simplification. The periodic table of elements had once served as a
powerful unifying scheme; now it seemed more like a taxonomical catalog,
itself unified by the deeper principles revealed by the quest inside the
atom. A rhetoric was appearing in popular writing about physics by
physicists and journalists: catchwords were fundamental and constituents
of matter and building blocks of nature and innermost sanctum of matter.
The phrases were seductive. Other kinds of science sought laws of nature,
but a kind of priority seemed to belong to the search for elementary units.

The prestige of particle physics also rose with a flood tide of military
support. Most plainly, the weapons laboratories prospered and such
agencies as the Office of Naval Research financed specific military
research projects.

A host of applied sciences, from electronics to cryptography, benefited
from the concrete interest of military program officers. Academic scientists
could immediately see the potential danger of allowing the armed forces to
direct the course of scientific research. “When science is allowed to exist
merely from the crumbs that fall from the table of a weapons development

institutions 

like DuBridge’s Caltech, even 

program,” said Caltech’s new president, Lee DuBridge, “then science is
headed into the stifling atmosphere of ‘mobilized secrecy’ and it is surely
doomed—even though the crumbs themselves should provide more than
adequate nourishment.” Yet the military also recognized this. One of the
many legacies of the Manhattan Project was that generals and admirals
now believed the scientists’ dogma: that researchers left alone to follow
their instincts will lay golden eggs. The bomb had been born of the esoteric
fancies of the mandarins—that was clear. Now pure physicists wished to
conduct basic research into forces and particles even stranger than those
powering atomic bombs; the public and the government supported them
enthusiastically. At 
the
theoretical programs of research on particle physics flourished by
accepting enormous government grants to which the professors applied in
groups. The grants paid for salaries, graduate students, office expenses,
and university overhead. The military actively encouraged, when it did not
finance directly, 
the giant cyclotrons, betatrons, synchrotrons, and
synchrocyclotrons, any one of which consumed more steel and electricity
than a prewar experimentalist could have imagined. These were not so
much crumbs from the weapons-development table as they were blank
checks from officials persuaded that physics worked miracles. Who could
say what was impossible? Free energy? Time travel? Antigravity? In 1954
the secretary of the army invited Feynman to serve as a paid consultant on
an army scientific advisory panel, and he agreed, traveling to Washington
for several days in November. At a cocktail party after one session, a
general confided that what the army really needed was a tank that could
use sand as fuel.

Earlier that year Feynman had picked up the telephone in Pasadena to
hear the chairman of the AEC, Admiral Lewis L. Strauss, say that he had
won his first major prize, the Albert Einstein Award: fifteen thousand dollars
and a gold medal. He was the third winner, after Kurt Gödel and Julian
Schwinger. Strauss informed him of the award (Feynman amused him by
saying, “Hot dog!”). The public announcement came from Oppenheimer as
director of the Institute for Advanced Study. Only gradually did it occur to
Feynman that this was the same Strauss who was in the process of
permanently removing Oppenheimer from public life. Strauss had carried
out President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s order to strip Oppenheimer of his

security clearance, after a letter to J. Edgar Hoover accused him, in the
fashion of the time, of being a “hardened Communist” who was probably
“functioning as an espionage agent.” The AEC began four weeks of
hearings in April. Many physicists publicly defended the man they had so
admired over the past decade. The famous, damaging exception was
Teller, who complained that Oppenheimer had not supported his hydrogen
bomb project and testified, choosing his words carefully, “I feel that I would
like to see the vital interests of this country in hands which I understand
better, and therefore trust more.” Under the circumstances Feynman did
not relish the prospect of accepting the award from Strauss. But Rabi, who
was visiting Caltech, advised him to go ahead. “You should never turn a
man’s generosity as a sword against him,” he recalled Rabi saying. “Any
virtue that a man has, even if he has many vices, should not be used as a
tool against him.”

In the frightened climate, atomic scientists developed an invisible trail of
agents, questioning their friends and childhood neighbors, painstakingly
uncovering the obvious, trying to tune in to a hearsay of who liked whom,
who resented whom, who might be likely to inform on whom. Feynman’s
own file at the FBI grew bulky. His Los Alamos friend Klaus Fuchs had
been imprisoned in 1950 for spying for the Soviet Union. Fortunately for
Feynman, the bureau did not realize how often Fuchs had lent Feynman his
car. It was noted that Feynman had once made a speech at Temple Israel
in Far Rockaway, “at which time he had spoken on brotherhood.” He was
described as a shy, retiring, introverted type of individual. Neighbors
vouched for his loyalty and doubted that he had participated in the high
school’s Young People’s Socialist League, which an investigating agent
described as “a militant, pro-communistic group of students.” Bethe was
pestered by an officer of the Department of Commerce for information
regarding Feynman’s “loyalty.” Finally he replied curtly, “Professor
Feynman is one of the leading theoretical physicists of the world. His
loyalty to the United States is unquestioned. Any further elaboration would
be an insult to Dr. Feynman.”

On one occasion the bureau discovered a “contact by Oppenheimer with
one ‘FINEMAN’ (phonetic)” and surmised “that this ‘FINEMAN’ is in fact subject
RICHARD FEYNMAN.” Officials discussed the possibility of turning him into a
confidential informant against Oppenheimer. They authorized a discreet

approach and then placed Feynman on the “no contact” list when he
refused to be interviewed by the bureau about anything at all. Agents
interviewed his Los Alamos colleagues, who generally described him as a
“prodigy” of “excellent character.” Yet it was learned that he sometimes
boasted of having “out-foxed” the Selective Service psychiatrists to obtain
a 4-F classification. One colleague considered him a “screwball.” Another
felt that his interest in “jazz” was not in keeping with the usual demeanor of
a physics professor. Yet he had voted for Eisenhower, according to
informants, registered Independent (not to be confused with Independent
Progressive), and “had no respect whatsoever for the Russians.” The
bureau carefully copied out newspaper accounts of his divorce. And one
oddity had to be reported:

FEYNMAN has developed a fair degree of skill opening sample
tumbler and Yale type locks with hairpins, bits of wire, etc… .
Feynman has been trying to learn the workings of safe locks and has
expressed an ambition to be able to open a safe.

In this first report the agent tried diligently to understand the exculpatory
opinion of the informant that “this was not indicative of any criminal
tendencies on the part of Feynman but was merely one of the works of a
brilliant mathematical mind challenged by a device considered practically
impossible of solution by an ordinary individual.” Nevertheless, the
suggestive combination of opened safes containing atomic secrets and
socialized with Klaus Fuchs proved irresistible to the anonymous authors
of memorandums, special inquiries, and secret airtels that swelled
Feynman’s file for years to come.

The bureau monitored one other incident with particular interest. The
Soviet Academy of Sciences invited Feynman to a conference in Moscow,
where he would have had a chance to meet the great Lev Landau and
other Russian physicists. Nuclear physics, particularly in its sensitive
guises, was not on the agenda. Still, the cream of Soviet physics was
engaged in a weapons program quickly catching up with the Americans’.
That year the Russians exploded an advanced, portable thermonuclear
bomb over Siberia. (One of its principal architects, the future dissident
Andrei Sakharov, watched from a platform on the snowy steppe, miles

from ground zero. Having read an American primer called the black book,
he decided it would be safe to remove his dark goggles.) Feynman
accepted the invitation enthusiastically, the Soviet Academy having offered
to cover his travel expenses. Then he had second thoughts. He wrote a
careful letter to the AEC to ask for the government’s advice. “I thought you
would be interested,” he said, “because I was connected to the Los
Alamos project during the war, so the danger that I might not be able to
return, or the attitude of public opinion must be considered.” After a delay,
officials at both the commission and the State Department replied, asking
him to turn the Soviets down. His presence might be exploited for
“propaganda gains.” Feynman acquiesced. He wrote the head of the
Soviet Academy 
it
impossible for me to attend.” The government also forced Freeman Dyson
to withdraw, warning him that under the McCarran Immigration Act he
might not be allowed back into the United States. Dyson did not surrender
so quietly, however. He told newspaper reporters, “This is a clear case in
which the law has been proved stupid.”

that “circumstances have arisen which make 

In their basic, nonweapons research, Russian physicists eagerly
pursued the latest developments in the United States and Europe. Yet a
faint difference in outlook between East and West was already unfolding.
The triumph of the atomic bomb had been an American triumph, had won
the American war, and had not ingrained itself so firmly into the Soviet
psyche (obsessed though policymakers were with the arms race).
Although an international-class synchrocyclotron went up in Dubno, money
was not so readily available for giant particle accelerators of the kind now
under construction in the United States. And the most influential single
figure in Soviet physics was Landau, famous for the catholicity of his
interests across the whole breadth of phenomena that could be called
theoretical physics. He had devoted his greatest work not to elementary
particles but to condensed matter: the dynamics of fluids, transitions
between one phase of matter and another, turbulence, plasmas, sound
dispersion, and low-temperature physics. Fundamental though all these
subjects were, in the United States their status was beginning to dim
slightly next to the glamour of particle physics. Not so in the Soviet Union,
where physicists were particularly eager in 1955 to meet Feynman. For his
first major work since quantum electrodynamics, he had turned away from

particle physics after all and chosen instead a subject close to Landau’s
heart: a theory of superfluidity, the frictionless motion of liquid helium
cooled to near absolute zero.

A Quantum Liquid

By then science-fiction writers had learned an interesting rule: not to let
their imaginations run too freely, too widely. It was often better to be
conservative. To create a strange new world, they had only to alter one or
two features of the usual reality and let the manifold unexpected
implications play themselves out. Nature, too, seemed capable of
adjusting a single rule and thereby creating the most bizarre phenomena.

Superfluid helium showed what happens when a liquid can flow with no
friction—not just low friction, but zero friction. Resting in a beaker, the liquid
spontaneously glides in a thin film up and over the walls, apparently in
defiance of gravity. It passes through cracks or holes so microscopically
small that even a gas would not fit through. No matter how perfectly a pair
of glass plates are polished to a smooth surface, and no matter how hard
they are pressed together, superfluid helium will still flow freely between
them. The liquid conducts heat far better than any ordinary substance, and
no amount of cooling will freeze it into a solid.

When Feynman talked about fluid flow, he knew he was returning to a
childlike, elemental fascination with the world as it is. The pleasure of
watching water in bathtubs or mud puddles on the sidewalk, of trying to
dam a curbside rivulet after a rainstorm, of contemplating the movement in
waterfalls and whirlpools—that was what made every child a physicist, he
felt. In trying to understand superfluidity, he began once again with first
principles. What was a fluid? A substance, liquid or gas, that cannot
withstand a shear stress, but moves under the force. The tendency of a
fluid to resist the shear is its viscosity, its internal friction—honey being
more viscous than water, water more than air. Nineteenth-century
physicists creating the first effective equations for fluid flow found viscosity
especially troublesome, so uncomputable were its consequences. For the
sake of simplicity, they often created models that ignored viscosity—and
for that John von Neumann later mocked them. Modelers always tried to

omit unnecessary complication—that was one thing. But classical fluid
dynamicists had omitted what seemed an essential, defining quality.
Sarcastically von Neumann called them theorists of “dry water.” Superfluid
helium, Feynman said, resembled that impossible idealization, fluid without
viscosity. It was dry water.

Superfluidity had an equally bizarre twin, superconductivity, the flow of
electricity with no dissipation or resistance. Both were phenomena of lowtemperature experimentation. Superconductivity had been discovered in
1911; superfluidity not until 1938, because of the difficulties of watching the
behavior of a liquid inside a pinhead-size container in a supercooled
cryostat. Esoteric though they were, by the fifties this pair of phenomena
had become crown jewels of the side of theoretical physics not devoted to
elementary particles. Little progress had been made in understanding the
perpetual-motion machinery that seemed to be at work. It seemed to
Feynman that they were like “two cities under siege … completely
surrounded by knowledge although they themselves remained isolated and
unassailable.” Besides Landau, the chief contributor to the theorizing on
superfluidity was Lars Onsager, the distinguished Yale chemist whose
notoriously difficult courses in statistical mechanics were sometimes called
(in allusion to Onsager’s accent) Norwegian I and Norwegian II.

Nature had exhibited another kind of perpetual motion, familiar to
quantum physicists: motion at the level of electrons in the atom. No friction
or dissipation slowed electrons. Only in the interactions of crowds of atoms
did the energy drain of friction arise. Were these super phenomena
somehow escaping the incoherent tumult of classical matter? Was this a
case of quantum mechanics writ large? Could the whole apparatus of
wave functions, energy levels, and quantum states translate itself onto
macroscopic scales? The most basic clue that this was indeed large-scale
quantum behavior came from the apparent unwillingness of helium to
freeze into hard crystals at any temperature. Classically, absolute zero was
often described as the temperature at which all motion ceases. Quantum
mechanically, there is no such temperature. Atomic motion never does
cease. That precise a zero would violate the uncertainty principle.

Landau and others had set the stage with a handful of useful
conceptions of liquid helium. One powerful idea, which continued to
dominate all kinds of solid-state physics, was the notion of new entities

—“quasiparticles” or “elementary excitations”—collective motions that
traveled through matter and interacted with one another as if they were
particles. Quantum sound waves, now called phonons, were one example.
Another: liquid helium seemed to contain units of rotational motion
christened rotons. Feynman tried to work out the implications of these
ideas. He also explored the notion that liquid helium acts as though it were
(here, as elsewhere, the old-fashioned is had to be permanently replaced
by the provisional acts as though it were) a mixture of two coexisting
substances, a normal liquid and a pure superfluid.

One of the strangest of all the liquid-helium manifestations demonstrated
how the mixture would work. A circular tube like a bicycle tire was packed
with powder and then filled with liquid helium. It was set spinning and then
abruptly halted. The powder would halt the flow of any normal liquid. But the
superfluid component of liquid helium would continue to flow, around and
around, passing through the microscopic interstices in the powder, in
effect ignoring the presence of another, normal liquid. Students could
sense the flow by feeling the tire’s resistance to torque, as a spinning
gyroscope resists sidelong pressure. And, once set in motion, the
superflow would persist as long as the universe itself.

At a meeting in New York of the American Physical Society in 1955
Feynman startled a Yale group, students of Onsager, who described a new
experiment they were conducting with rotating buckets. (In the lowtemperature business “buckets” tended to be glass tubes the size of a
thimble.) Feynman rose and said that a rotating bucket of superfluid would
be filled with peculiar vortices, whirlpools hanging down like strings. The
speakers had no idea what he was talking about. This peculiar image was
the essence of his visualization of the atomic behavior of liquid helium. He
had tried to picture how individual atoms would move together within the
fluid; he calculated the forces between them as directly as he could, with
tools dating back to his undergraduate research with John Slater. He saw
that rotational motions would arise, just as Landau had suggested, and he
applied the quantum-mechanical restriction that such motion would have to
come in indivisible units. For a while he struggled to find the right image for
an elementary excitation in a superfluid. He considered an atom in a cage,
oscillating. A pair of atoms revolving one around the other. A tiny rotating
ring of atoms. The challenge was to drive toward a solution of a many-

particle problem in quantum mechanics without being able to begin with a
formal, mathematical line of reasoning. It was a challenge in pure
visualization.

He lay awake in bed one night trying to imagine how rotation could arise
at all. He imagined a liquid divided by a thin sheet, an imaginary
impermeable membrane. On one side the liquid was motionless; on the
other side it flowed. He knew how to write the old-fashioned Schrödinger
wave function for both sides. Then he imagined the sheet disappearing.
How could he make the wave functions join? He thought about the different
phases combining. He imagined a kind of surface tension, energy
proportional to the surface area of his sheet. He considered what would
happen when an individual atom moved across the boundary—at what
point in the rising and falling wave of energy the surface tension would fall
to zero and the atom would be able to move freely. He was starting to see
a surface divided into strips of glue, where the atoms could not mix, and
other narrow strips where atoms would be able to change places. He
calculated how little energy it would take to distort the wave function until
the atoms would be held back, and realized that the strips of free motion
would be no more than the width of a single atom. Then he realized that he
was seeing lines, vortex lines around which the atoms circulated in rings.
The rings of atoms were like rings of children waiting to use a playground
slide. As each child descended—the wave function changing from plus to
minus—another would slip into position at the top. But the fluid version was
more than just a two-dimensional ring. It also wound back on itself through
the third dimension—like a smoke ring, Feynman concluded, twenty years
after he had led an investigation of smoke-ring dynamics in his high school
physics club. These quantum smoke rings, or vortex lines, would circle
about the tiniest conceivable hole, just one atom’s width across.

In a succession of articles spanning five years he worked out the
consequences of his view of the interplay of energy and motion in this
quantum fluid. The vortex lines were the fundamental units, the indivisible
quanta of the system. They set limits on the ways in which energy could be
exchanged within the fluid. In a thin enough tube, or a slow enough flow, the
lines would not be able to form, and the flow would just coast, unchanging,
losing no energy, and thus absolutely free of resistance. He showed when
vortex lines would arise and when they would vanish. He showed when they

turbulence. Caltech hired 

would begin to entangle one another and ball up, creating another
unexpected phenomenon that no one had yet seen in the laboratory:
low-temperature experimental
superfluid 
specialists, and Feynman worked with them closely. He learned all the
details of the apparatus, vacuum pumps for cooling by lowering the vapor
pressure; rubber O-rings for ensuring tight seals. Before long, word was
spreading of an experiment that struck physicists as “typical Feynman.”
Tiny wings, airfoils, were attached to a thin quartz fiber hanging down
through a tube. The superfluid was pulled through vertically. A normal fluid
would have spun the wings like a tiny propeller, but the superfluid refused
to cause twisting. Instead it slipped frictionlessly past. In their search for
lighter and lighter airfoils, the experimenters finally killed some local flies,
or so they claimed, and the investigation became known as the flies’-wings
experiment.

Physicists who had worked in the area of condensed matter for longer
than Feynman—and who would remain there after Feynman had once
again departed—were struck by his method as much as by his success.
He used none of the technical apparatus for which he was now famous: no
Feynman diagrams, no path integrals. Instead he began with mental
pictures: this electron pushes that one; this ion rebounds like a ball on a
spring. He reminded colleagues of an artist who can capture the image of
a human face with three or four minimal and expressive lines. Yet he did
not always succeed. As he worked on superfluidity, he also struggled with
superconductivity, and here, for once, he failed. (Yet he came close. At one
point, about to leave on a trip, he wrote a single page of notes, beginning,
“Possibly I understand the main origin of superconductivity.” He was
focusing on a particular kind of phonon interaction and on one of the
experimental signatures of superconductivity, a transition in a substance’s
specific heat. He could see, as he jotted to himself, that there was
“something still a little haywire,” but he thought he would be able to work out
the difficulties. He signed the page: “In case I don’t return. R. P.
Feynman.”) Three younger physicists, intensely aware of Feynman’s
competitive presence—John Bardeen, Leon Cooper, and Robert
Schrieffer—invented a successful theory in 1957. The year before,
Schrieffer had listened intently as Feynman delivered a pellucid talk on the
two phenomena: the problem he had solved, and the problem that had

defeated him. Schrieffer had never heard a scientist outline in such loving
detail a sequence leading to failure. Feynman was uncompromisingly frank
flawed
about each 
visualization.

faulty approximation, each 

false step, each 

No tricks or fancy calculations would suffice, Feynman said. The only
way to solve the problem would be to guess the outline, the shape, the
quality of the answer.

We have no excuse that there are not enough experiments, it has
nothing to do with experiments. Our situation is unlike the field, say, of
mesons, where we say, perhaps there aren’t yet enough clues for
even a human mind to figure out what is the pattern. We should not
even have to look at the experiments… . It is like looking in the back of
the book for the answer … The only reason that we cannot do this
problem of superconductivity 
that we haven’t got enough
is 
imagination.

It fell to Schrieffer to transcribe Feynman’s talk for journal publication. He
did not quite know what to do with the incomplete sentences and the frank
confessions. He had never read a journal article so obviously spoken
aloud. So he edited it. But Feynman made him change it all back.

New Particles, New Language

In the mere half-decade since the triumph of the new quantum
electrodynamics the culture of high-energy physics had made and remade
itself again and again. The language, the interests, and the machinery
seemed to undergo a new transformation monthly. Experimentalists and
theorists assembled yearly for meetings called Rochester conferences
(after their initial site, Rochester, New York), descendants of the already
mythic-seeming Shelter Island–Pocono–Oldstone meetings, but far larger
and better financed, scores and then hundreds of participants. By the first
of these meetings, at the close of 1950, quantum electrodynamics itself
was already passé; it was so perfect experimentally and so far from the
frontier of new forces and particles. That year had seen a kind of

it 

milestone, the discovery of a new particle not in cosmic rays but in an
experimentalist’s accelerator. This was a neutral pi meson, or pion
—“neutral” because it carried no charge. Actually, the experimenters did
not so much detect the neutral pion as the pair of gamma rays into which it
immediately decayed. This particle’s ephemerality made 
less
consequential in the everyday world of tables and chairs, chemistry and
biology, than on this exciting frontier: it typically vanished after a lifetime of
a tenth of a millionth of a billionth of a second. This qualified as a short time
by 1950 standards. Yet standards were changing. Within a few years
particle tabulations would list this fleeting entity in the category of STABLE.
And meanwhile the legions of cosmic-ray explorers, many of them British,
hoisting their photographic plates skyward with balloons, would find their
specialty declining as spectacularly as it had risen. “Gentlemen, we have
been invaded,” one of their leaders declared. “The accelerators are here.”
Of necessity physicists dispensed with their earlier squeamishness
about the prospect of adding yet another particle to the already rich stew.
On the contrary, an experimentalist could hardly aspire to more than the
creation and discovery of a new particle. What it meant to measure these
particles had also changed dramatically since the days when electrons had
held center stage. Inferring the mass of a particle from the arcing traces left
in a cloud chamber by its second- and third-generation decay products
was not so simple. An enormous range of error had to be tolerated. It had
become a serious and worthwhile intellectual challenge merely to identify
the particles, to name them, to write down the rules of which particles could
decay into which other particles. These rules were pithy new equations: π
+ p→π0 + n,, a pion with negative charge and a proton produce a neutral
pion and a neutron. Never mind assessing the mass; it was hard enough to
identify the objects of study. Declaring the existence or nonexistence of a
certain particle became a delicate rite imbued with as much anticipation
and judgment as declaring a rain delay at a baseball game.

This was the experimenters’ art, but, as the accelerator era began,
Feynman took a special interest in the methodologies and pitfalls. He was
influenced by Bethe, who always wanted to ground his theory in his own
intuitions about the numbers, and by Fermi, the field’s last great
combination of experimenter and theorist. Bethe spent time working out
formulas for the probabilities of various wrong curvatures in cloud-chamber

photographs. One experimentalist, Marcel Schein, set off a typical
commotion with the announcement that he had discovered a new particle
in cyclotron experiments. Bethe was suspicious. The energies seemed far
too low to produce the kind of particle Schein described. Feynman forever
remembered the confrontation between the two men, their faces eerily
illuminated by the glow from the light table used to view the photographic
plates. Bethe looked at one plate and said that the gas of the cloud
chamber seemed to be swirling, distorting the curvatures. In the next plate,
and the next, and the next, he saw different sources of potential error.
Finally they came to a clean-looking photograph, and Bethe mentioned the
statistical likelihood of errors. Schein said that Bethe’s own formula
predicted only a one-in-five chance of error. Yes, Bethe replied, and we’ve
already looked at five plates. To Feynman, looking on, it seemed like
classic self-deception: a researcher believes in the result he is seeking,
and he starts to overweight the favorable evidence and underweight the
possible counterexamples. Schein finally said in frustration: You have a
different theory for every case, while I have a single hypothesis that
explains all at once. Bethe replied, Yes, and the difference is that each of
my many explanations is right and your one explanation is wrong.

A few years later Feynman happened to be visiting Berkeley when
experimenters excitedly thought they had discovered an antiproton—a
particle clearly destined to be found at higher energies, but impossible,
Feynman thought, at the mere hundreds of millions of electron volts
available that year. As Bethe had, he went into a dark room to examine the
photographs, a dozen questionable images and one that seemed
absolutely perfect, the cornerstone of the discovery, with its track curving
backward just as the antiparticle must.

There must be matter somewhere in the vacuum chamber, Feynman

said.

Absolutely not, the experimenters told him—just thin glass walls on either

side.

Feynman asked what held the upper and lower plates together. They

said there were four small bolts.

He looked again at the white arc curving through the magnetic field.
Then he jabbed his pencil down onto the table, inches away from the edge
of the photograph. Right here, he said, must be one of those bolts.

into 

the bolt and scattered backward 

The blueprint, retrieved from the files and laid out over the photograph,
showed that his pencil had found the exact spot. An ordinary proton had
the picture. Later,
struck 
experimenters at Caltech felt that Feynman’s very presence exerted a sort
of moral pressure on their findings and methods. He was mercilessly
skeptical. He loved to talk about the famous oil-drop experiment of
Caltech’s first great physicist Robert Millikan, which revealed the
indivisible unit charge of the electron by isolating it in tiny, floating oil drops.
The experiment was right but some of the numbers were wrong—and the
record of subsequent experimenters stood as a permanent
embarrassment to physics. They did not cluster around the correct result;
rather, they slowly closed in on it. Millikan’s error exerted a psychological
pull, like a distant magnet forcing their observations off center. If a Caltech
experimenter told Feynman about a result reached after a complex
process of correcting data, Feynman was sure to ask how the
experimenter had decided when to stop correcting, and whether that
decision had been made before the experimenter could see what effect it
would have on the outcome. It was all too easy to fall into the trap of
correcting until the answer looked right. To avoid it required an intimate
acquaintanceship with the rules of the scientist’s game. It also required not
just honesty, but a sense that honesty required exertion.

As the particle era unfolded, however, it made other demands of top
theorists—whose ranks, meanwhile, were expanding. They had to
demonstrate new kinds of flair in sorting through the relations between
particles. They competed to invent abstract concepts to help organize the
information arriving from accelerators. A new quantum number like
isotopic spin—a quantity that seemed to be conserved through many kinds
of interactions—implied new incarnations of symmetry. This notion
increasingly dominated the physicists’ discourse. Symmetry for physicists
was not far removed from symmetry for children with paper and scissors:
the idea that something remains the same when something else changes.
Mirror symmetry is the sameness that remains after a reflection of left and
right. Rotational symmetry is the sameness that remains when a system
turns on an axis. Isotopic spin symmetry, as it happened, was the
sameness that existed between the two components of the nucleus, the
proton and the neutron, two particles whose relationship had been oddly

close, one carrying charge and the other neutral, their masses nearly but
not exactly identical. The new way to understand these particles was this:
They were two states of a single entity, now called a nucleon. They differed
only in their isotopic spin. One was “up,” the other “down.”

Theorists of the new generation had not only to master the quantum
electrodynamics set forth by Feynman and Dyson. They also had to arm
themselves with a rococo repertoire of methods suited to the new territory.
Physicists had long utilized exotic variations of the idea of space—
imaginary spaces in which the axes might represent quantities other than
physical distance. “Momentum space,” for example, allowed them to plot
and to visualize a particle’s momentum as though it were merely another
spatial variable. One grew comfortable with such spaces, and now they
were multiplying. Isotopic spin space became essential to understanding
the strong forces acting on nucleons.

Other concepts, too, had to become second nature. Symmetries
suggested that various particles must come in families: pairs, or triplets, or
(as physicists now said) multiplets. Physicists experimented with what they
called “selection rules”—rules about what must or must not happen in
particle collisions on account of the conservation of quantities like charge.
A physicist Feynman’s age, Abraham Pais, guessed at a rule called
“associated production”—certain collisions must produce new particles in
groups, preserving some putative new quantum number, the nature of
which was unknown. Feynman had had a similar idea in Brazil but had not
liked it enough to pursue it diligently. For a few years associated
production became an important catchphrase. Experimenters looked for
examples or counterexamples. In the longer term its main contribution to
physics was that its popularity rankled a younger theorist, Murray GellMann. He thought Pais was wrong, and he was jealous.

Murray

At fourteen he had been declared “Most Studious” and “wonder boy” by his
classmates at Columbia Grammar, a private school on the Upper West
Side of New York, and that was the last they saw of him, for he was already
a senior, and he started at Yale that fall. Gell-Mann’s surname was subtly

difficult to pronounce. It was wrong to unstress the second syllable, as if the
name were Gelman, although Murray’s older brother, Benedict, had
chosen that simpler spelling. Many people leaned the other way, toward a
pedantic, European style of pronunciation, the accent on the second
syllable and the a broad: gel-MAHN. This, too, was wrong. Later, when he
had secretaries, they sometimes upbraided malefactors: “He’s not
German, you know.” Of course the g was hard, despite the unconscious tug
of the soft g in the word gel. Natives of New York and other regions that
distinguish between the a’s of man and mat suspected rightly that the
second, flatter a must be better for Gell-Mann. It was safest to stress the
two syllables almost equally. By then anyone who knew anything about
Gell-Mann knew that his own pronunciation of names in any language was
impeccable. Supposedly he would lecture visitors from Strasbourg or
Pago Pago about the niceties of their own Alsatian or Samoan dialects.
He was so insistent about differentiating the pronunciations of Colombia
and Columbia that colleagues suspected him of straining to bring
references to the country into conversations about the university. From the
beginning most physicists simply referred to him as Murray. There was
never any doubt which Murray they meant. Feynman, preparing for a
cameo performance as a tribal chieftain in a Caltech production of South
Pacific, taught himself a few words of Samoan and then resignedly told a
friend, “The only person who will know I’m pronouncing this wrong is
Murray.”

Gell-Mann attended Columbia Grammar on full scholarship. His father,
born in Austria, had learned to speak a perfectly unaccented English and
so, in the early 1920s, decided to start a language school for immigrants. It
was the closest to success that he came, as his son saw it. The school
moved several times—once, as Murray recalled, because his mother was
afraid that his brother would catch whooping cough from someone in the
building—and went out of business a few years later. It was his brother,
nine years older and so adored by his parents, who taught him to read and
to take pleasure in language, science, and art. Benedict was a birdwatcher and nature lover before nature became a practical field of interest;
dropping out of college at the height of the Depression, he stunned his
parents and left a complicated impression on his younger brother.

Murray did not find his way immediately to physics, talented as he was in

so many subjects. When he applied to the Ivy League graduate schools, he
was widely disappointed: Yale would take him only in mathematics,
Harvard would take him only if he paid full fare, and Princeton would not
take him at all. So he made a half-hearted application to MIT and heard
directly back from Victor Weisskopf, whom he had not heard of. Gell-Mann
decided to accept Weisskopf’s offer, though grudgingly. MIT seemed so
lumpen. The joke he told ever after was that the alternatives did not
commute: he could try MIT first and suicide second, whereas the other
ordering would not work. He reached MIT in 1948, close to his nineteenth
birthday, just in time to watch the exploding competition in quantum
electrodynamics from the vantage point of an office near Weisskopf’s.
When Weisskopf advised him that the future belonged to Feynman, he
studied the available preprints. Feynman’s struck him as a cuckoo private
language, though correct; Schwinger’s version struck him as hollow and
pompous; Dyson’s as crude and sloppy. He was already inclined toward
scabrous assessments of his famous fellow physicists, though for now he
kept them mostly private.

His own work was not quite living up to his severe expectations, though
he was finally beginning to impress other physicists. After a year at the
Institute for Advanced Study he joined Fermi’s group at Chicago. He was
in time to join the tumultuous effort to find the right concepts, the right
ordering principles, the right quantum numbers for understanding the many
new particles. There was confusion and there were regularities—
coincidences in the experimental plots of particle masses and lifetimes.
There were mesons that seemed to exist, and mesons that seemed
plausible but absent. There were even more mysterious particles called Vparticles. The problem with these enormously massive items was that
particle accelerators produced them copiously, with relative ease, yet they
did not decay with corresponding ease. They lingered for as long as a
billionth of a second. Pais’s approach to associated production had
reached toward the heart of some of the regularities in need of
explanation. It contained the crucial idea of another hidden symmetry. It
was also reaching a peak of popularity: in the summer of 1953 Pais
created such a stir at an international conference in Japan that Time
magazine called him at his hotel. His roommate answered the phone—it
happened to be Feynman, attending the same conference to present his

liquid helium results. Feynman felt a flicker of envy when he realized that
Time had no interest in him. Gell-Mann, in Chicago, felt even more,
particularly since he now saw a far more powerful answer.

Physicists had learned to speak comfortably about four fundamental
forces: gravity; electromagnetism, which dominated all chemical and
electrical processes; the strong force binding the atom’s nucleus; and the
weak force, at work in the slow processes of radioactive decay. The quick
appearance and slow disappearance of V-particles suggested that their
creation relied on strong forces and that weak forces came into play as
they decayed. Gell-Mann proposed a new fundamental quantity, which for a
while he called y. This y was like a new form of charge. Charge is
conserved in particle events—the total going in equals the total coming out.
that y is conserved, too—but not always. The
Gell-Mann supposed 
algebraic logic of Gell-Mann’s scheme decreed that strong interactions
would conserve y, and so would electromagnetic interactions, but weak
interactions would not. They would break the symmetry. Thus strong
interactions would create a pair of particles whose y had to cancel each
other (1 and – 1, for example). Such a particle, having flown away from its
sibling, could not decay through a strong interaction because there was no
longer a canceling y. That gave the slower weak interaction time to take
over.

Artificial though it was, Gell-Mann’s y qualified as not just a description
but an explanation. As he conceived his framework, it was an organizing
principle. It gave him a way of seeing families of particles, and its logic
was so compelling that the families had obvious missing members. He
was able to predict—and did predict, in papers he began publishing in
August 1953—specific new particles not yet discovered, as well as
specific particles that he insisted could not be discovered. His timing was
perfect. Experimenters bore out each of his positive predictions (and failed
to contradict the negative ones). But this was only part of Gell-Mann’s
triumph. He also injected a piece of his fascination with language into the
temporarily befuddled business of physics nomenclature. He decided to
call his quantity y “strangeness” and the families of V-like particles
“strange.” A Japanese physicist, Kazuhiko Nishijima, who had
independently hit upon the same scheme just months after Gell-Mann,

chose the considerably less friendly name “?-charge.” Amid all the -ons
and Greek-lettered particles, strange sounded whimsical and unorthodox.
The editors of the Physical Review would not allow “Strange Particles” in
Gell-Mann’s title, insisting instead on “New Unstable Particles.” Pais did
not like it either. He pleaded with the audience at a Rochester conference
to avoid loaded terms like “strange.” Why should a broad-minded theorist
consider one particle stranger than another? The quirkiness of the word
had a distancing effect: perhaps this new construct was not quite as real
as charge. But Gell-Mann’s command of language had an unstoppable
force. Strangeness was only the beginning.

The winter Fermi died, just before Christmas 1954, Gell-Mann wrote to
the one physicist who seemed to him utterly genuine, free of phoniness, the
one who did not worship formalism and superficialities, whose own work
was always sure to be interesting and real. Some of Feynman’s
colleagues were already beginning to think that he had drifted away from
the mainstream of particle physics, but it did not seem that way to GellMann. On the contrary, he knew from their few conversations that Feynman
was thinking about all the outstanding problems, all the time. Feynman
responded in a friendly way. Gell-Mann visited Caltech to give a talk on his
current work. The two men met privately and spoke for hours. Gell-Mann
described work he had done extending Feynman’s quantum
electrodynamics at short distances. Feynman said he knew of the work
and admired it enormously—that in fact it was the only such work he had
seen that he had not already done himself. He had pursued Gell-Mann’s
line of thinking and generalized it further—he showed what he meant—and
Gell-Mann said he thought that was wonderful.

Playing the bongos: “On the infrequent occasions when I have been called upon in
a formal place to play the bongo drums, the introducer never seems to find it necessary
to mention that I also do theoretical physics.”

Talking with a student as Murray Cell-Mann looks on: “Murray’s mask was a man
ofgreat culture… Dick’s mask was Mr. Natural—just a little boy from the country that
could see through things the city slickers can’t.”

With his hero, Paul A. M. Dirac, in Warsaw, 1962.

With Carl Feynman, three years old, facing photographers on the morning of the
Nobel Prize: “Listen, buddy, if I could tell you in a minute what I did, it wouldn’t be worth
the NobelPrize.”

Celebrating the Nobel Prize in Stockholm, 1965, with Gweneth Feynman (above)

and a princess (below).

With Schwinger: “I thought you would be happy that I beat Schwinger out at last,”
Feynman wrote his mother after winning one award, “but it turns out he got the thing 3
yrs ago.Of course, he only got 112 a medal, so 1guess you'll be happy. You always
compareme with Schwinger.”

Shin’ichirō Tomonaga, whose work in an isolated Japan paralleled the new th
eories of Feynman and Schwinger: “Why isn’t nature clearer and more directly
comprehensible?”

With Carl and Michelle (right), and on a desert camping trip.

Standing at a Cal tech blackboard and playing a chieftain in a student production of

South Pacific.

At the February 10, 1986, hearing of the presidential commission on the space
shuttle accident: “I took this stuff that I got out of your sealand I put it in ice water,and I
discovered that when you put some pressure on it fora while and then undo it it doesn't
stretch back. It stays the same dimension. In other words, for a few seconds at least and
moreseconds than that, there is no resilience in this particular material when it is at a

temperature of 32 degrees. I believe that has somesignificance for our problem.”

By the beginning of the new year Caltech had made Gell-Mann an offer
and Gell-Mann had accepted. He moved into an office just upstairs from
Feynman’s. Caltech had now placed together in one building the two
leading minds of their generation. To the close-knit, international
community of physicists—a small world, no matter how rapidly it was
growing—the collaborations and the rivalries between these men gained
an epic quality. They were together, working or feuding, leaving their
imprint on every area they cared to touch, for the rest of Feynman’s life.
They gave their colleagues a long time to muse on how strikingly different
were the ways in which a giant intellect might choose to reveal itself, even
in the person of a modern theoretical physicist.

In Search of Genius

In the spring of 1955 the man most plainly and universally identified with the
word genius died at Princeton Hospital. Most of his body was cremated,
the ashes scattered, but not the brain. The hospital’s pathologist, Dr.
Thomas S. Harvey, removed this last remnant to a jar of formaldehyde.

Harvey weighed it. A mediocre two and two-thirds pounds. One more
negative datum to sabotage the notion that the brain’s size might account
for the difference between ordinary and extraordinary mental ability—a
notion that various nineteenth-century researchers had labored futilely to
establish (claiming along the way to have demonstrated the superiority of
men over women, white men over black men, and Germans over
Frenchmen). The brain of the great mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss
had been turned over to such scientists. It disappointed them. Now, with
Einstein’s cerebrum on their hands, researchers proposed more subtle
ways of searching for the secret of genius: measuring the density of
surrounding blood vessels, the percentage of glial cells, the degree of
neuronal branching. Decades passed. Microscope sections and

photographic slides of Einstein’s brain circulated among a tight circle of
anatomically minded psychologists, called neuropsychologists, unable to
let go the idea that a detectable sign of the qualities that made Einstein
famous might remain somewhere in these fragmentary trophies. By the
1980s this most famous of brains had been whittled down to small gray
shreds preserved in the office of a pathologist retired to Wichita, Kansas—
a sodden testament to the elusiveness of the quality called genius.

Eventually the findings were inconclusive, though that did not make them
unpublishable. (One researcher counted a large excess of branching cells
in the parietal sector called Brodmann area 39.) Those searching for
genius’s corporeal basis had little enough material from which to work. “Is
there a neurological substrate for talent?” asked the editors of one
neuropsychology volume. 
“Of course, as neuropsychologists we
hypothesize that there must be such a substrate and would hardly think to
relegate talent somehow to ‘mind.’ What evidence currently exists would
be the results of the work on Einstein’s brain …”—the brain that created
the post-Newtonian universe, that released the pins binding us to absolute
space and time, that visualized (in its parietal lobe?) a plastic fourth
dimension, that banished the ether, that refused to believe God played
dice, that piloted such a kindly, forgetful form about the shaded streets of
Princeton. There was only one Einstein. For schoolchildren and
neuropsychologists alike, he stood as an icon of intellectual power. He
seemed—but was this true?—to have possessed a rare and distinct
quality, genius as an essence, not a mere statistical extremum on a
supposed bell-curve of intelligence. This was the conundrum of genius.
Was genius truly special? Or was it a matter of degree—a miler breaking
3:50 rather than 4:10? (A shifting bell-curve, too: yesterday’s record-setter,
today’s also-ran.) Meanwhile, no one had thought to dissect the brains of
Niels Bohr, Paul A. M. Dirac, Enrico Fermi; Sigmund Freud, Pablo
Picasso, Virginia Woolf; Jascha Heifetz, Isadora Duncan, Babe Ruth; or
any of the other exceptional, creative, intuitive souls to whom the word was
so often and so lubricously applied.

What a strange and bewildering literature grew up around the term
genius—defining it, analyzing it, categorizing it, rationalizing and reifying it.
Commentators have contrasted it with such qualities as (mere) talent,
intellect, imagination, originality, industriousness, sweep of mind and

elegance of style; or have shown how genius is composed of these in
various combinations. Psychologists and philosophers, musicologists and
art critics, historians of science and scientists themselves have all stepped
into this quagmire, a capacious one. Their several centuries of labor have
produced no consensus on any of the necessary questions. Is there such a
quality? If so, where does it come from? (A glial surplus in Brodmann area
39? A doting, faintly unsuccessful father who channels his intellectual
ambition into his son? A frightful early encounter with the unknown, such as
death of a sibling?) When otherwise sober scientists speak of the genius
as magician, wizard, or superhuman, are they merely indulging in a flight of
literary fancy? When people speak of the borderline between genius and
madness, why is it so evident what they mean? And a question that has
barely been asked (the where-are-the-.400-hitters question): Why, as the
pool of available humans has risen from one hundred million to one billion
to five billion, has the production of geniuses—Shakespeares, Newtons,
Mozarts, Einsteins—seemingly choked off to nothing, genius itself coming
to seem like the property of the past?

“Enlightened, penetrating, and capacious minds,” as William Duff chose
to put it two hundred years ago, speaking of such exemplars as Homer,
Quintilian, and Michelangelo in one of a string of influential essays by mideighteenth-century Englishmen that gave birth to the modern meaning of
the word genius. Earlier, it had meant spirit, the magical spirit of a jinni or
more often the spirit of a nation. Duff and his contemporaries wished to
identify genius with the godlike power of invention, of creation, of making
what never was before, and to do so they had to create a psychology of
imagination: 
and VOLATILE power”;
imagination “perpetually attempting to soar” and “apt to deviate into the
mazes of error.”

imagination with a 

“RAMBLING 

Imagination is that faculty whereby the mind not only reflects on its
own operations, but which assembles the various ideas conveyed to
the understanding by the canal of sensation, and treasured up in the
repository of the memory, compounding or disjoining them at
pleasure; and which, by 
inventing new
associations of ideas, and of combining them with infinite variety, is
enabled to present a creation of its own, and to exhibit scenes and

its plastic power of 

objects which never existed in nature.

These were qualities that remained two centuries later at the center of
cognitive scientists’ efforts to understand creativity: the mind’s capacity for
self-reflection, self-reference, self-comprehension; the dynamical and fluid
creation of concepts and associations. The early essayists on genius,
writing with a proper earnestness, attempting to reduce and regularize a
phenomenon with (they admitted) an odor of the inexplicable, nevertheless
saw that genius allowed a certain recklessness, even a lack of
craftsmanship. Genius seemed natural, unlearned, uncultivated.
Shakespeare was—“in point of genius,” Alexander Gerard wrote in 1774
—Milton’s superior, despite a “defective” handling of poetic details. The
torrent of analyses and polemics on genius that appeared in those years
introduced a rhetoric of ranking and comparing that became a standard
method of the literature. Homer versus Virgil, Milton versus Virgil,
Shakespeare versus Milton. The results—a sort of tennis ladder for the
genius league—did not always wear well with the passage of time. Newton
versus Bacon? In Gerard’s view Newton’s discoveries amounted to a filling
in of a framework developed with more profound originality by Bacon
—“who, without any assistance, sketched out the whole design.” Still, there
were those bits of Newtonian mathematics to consider. On reflection
Gerard chose to leave for posterity “a question of very difficult solution,
which of the two had the greatest genius.”

He and his contemporary essayists had a purpose. By understanding
genius, rationalizing it, celebrating it, and teasing out its mechanisms,
perhaps they could make the process of discovery and invention less
accidental. In later times that motivation has not disappeared. More overtly
than ever, the nature of genius—genius as the engine of scientific
discovery—has become an issue bound up with the economic fortunes of
nations. Amid the vast modern network of universities, corporate
laboratories, and national science foundations has arisen an awareness
that the best financed and best organized of research enterprises have not
learned to engender, perhaps not even to recognize, world-turning
originality.

Genius, Gerard summed up in 1774, “is confessed to be a subject of
capital importance, without the knowledge of which a regular method of

invention cannot be established, and useful discoveries must continue to
be made, as they have generally been made hitherto, merely by chance.”
Hitherto, as well. In our time he continues to be echoed by historians of
science frustrated by the sheer ineffability of it all. But they keep trying to
replace awe with understanding. J. D. Bernal said in 1939:

It is one of the hopes of the science of science that, by careful
analysis of past discovery, we shall find a way of separating the
effects of good organization from those of pure luck, and enabling us
to operate on calculated risks rather than blind chance.

Yet how could anyone rationalize a quality as fleeting and accidentprone as a genius’s inspiration: Archimedes and his bath, Newton and his
apple? People love stories about geniuses as alien heroes, possessing a
quality beyond human understanding, and scientists may be the world’s
happiest consumers of such stories. A modern example:

A physicist studying quantum field theory with Murray Gell-Mann at the
California Institute of Technology in the 1950s, before standard texts
have become available, discovers unpublished lecture notes by Richard
Feynman, circulating samizdat style. He asks Gell-Mann about them.
Gell-Mann says no, Dick’s methods are not the same as the methods
used here. The student asks, well, what are Feynman’s methods? GellMann leans coyly against the blackboard and says, Dick’s method is
this. You write down the problem. You think very hard. (He shuts his eyes
and presses his knuckles parodically to his forehead.) Then you write
down the answer.

The same story appeared over and over again. It was an old genre.

From an 1851 tract titled Genius and Industry:

(A professor from the University of Cambridge calls upon a genius of
mathematics working in Manchester as a lowly clerk.) “… from Geometry
to Logarithms, and to the Differential and Integral Calculus; and thence
again to questions the most foreign and profound: at last, a question was
proposed to the poor clerk—a question which weeks had been required
to solve. Upon a simple slip of paper it was answered immediately. ‘But
how,’ said the Professor, ‘do you work this? show me the rule! … The

answer is correct but you have reached it by a different way.’

“‘I have worked it,’ said the clerk, ‘from a rule in my own mind. I cannot

show you the law—I never saw it myself; the law is in my mind.’

“‘Ah!’ said the Professor, ‘if you talk of a law within your mind, I have

done; I cannot follow you there.’”

Magicians again. As Mark Kac said: “… The working of their minds is
for all intents and purposes incomprehensible. Even after we understand
what they have done, the process by which they have done it is completely
dark.” The notion places a few individuals at the margin of their community
—the impractical margin, since the stock in trade of the scientist is the
method that can be transferred from one practitioner to the next.

If the most distinguished physicists and mathematicians believe in the
genius as magician, it is partly for psychological protection. A merely
excellent scientist could suffer an unpleasant shock when he discussed his
work with Feynman. It happened again and again: physicists would wait for
an opportunity to get Feynman’s judgment of a result on which they had
staked weeks or months of their career. Typically Feynman would refuse to
allow them to give a full explanation. He said it spoiled his fun. He would let
them describe just the outline of the problem before he would jump up and
say, Oh, I know that … and scrawl on the blackboard not his visitor’s result,
A, but a harder, more general theorem, X. So A (about to be mailed,
perhaps, to the Physical Review) was merely a special case. This could
cause pain. Sometimes it was not clear whether Feynman’s lightning
answers came from instantaneous calculation or from a storehouse of
previously worked-out—and unpublished—knowledge. The astrophysicist
Willy Fowler proposed at a Caltech seminar in the 1960s that quasars—
mysterious blazing radiation sources lately discovered in the distant sky—
were supermassive stars, and Feynman immediately rose, astonishingly,
to say that such objects would be gravitationally unstable. Furthermore, he
said that the instability followed from general relativity. The claim required
a calculation of the subtle countervailing effects of stellar forces and
relativistic gravity. Fowler thought he was talking through his hat. A
colleague later discovered that Feynman had done a hundred pages of
work on 
the problem years before. The Chicago astrophysicist
Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar independently produced Feynman’s result

—it was part of the work for which he won a Nobel Prize twenty years later.
Feynman himself never bothered to publish. Someone with a new idea
always risked finding, as one colleague said, “that Feynman had signed
the guest book and already left.”

A great physicist who accumulated knowledge without taking the trouble
to publish could be a genuine danger to his colleagues. At best it was
unnerving to learn that one’s potentially career-advancing discovery had
been, to Feynman, below the threshold of publishability. At worst it
undermined one’s confidence in the landscape of the known and not
known. There was an uneasy subtext to the genus of story prompted by this
habit. It was said of Lars Onsager, for example, that a visitor would ask him
about a new result; sitting in his office chair he would say, I believe that is
correct; then he would bend forward diffidently to open a file drawer, glance
sidelong at a long-buried page of notes, and say, Yes, I thought so; that is
correct. This was not always precisely what the visitor had hoped to hear.

to something ancient and cabalistic: 

A person with a mysterious storehouse of unwritten knowledge was a
wizard. So was a person with the power to tease from nature its hidden
secrets—a scientist, that is. The modern scientist’s view of his quest
laws, rules,
harkened back 
symmetries hidden just beneath the visible surface. Sometimes this view
of the search for knowledge became overwhelming, even oppressive. John
Maynard Keynes, facing a small audience in a darkened room at
Cambridge a few years before his death, spoke of Newton as “this strange
spirit, who was tempted by the Devil to believe … that he could reach all
the secrets of God and Nature by the pure power of mind—Copernicus
and Faustus in one.”

Why do I call him a magician? Because he looked on the whole
universe and all that is in it as a riddle, as a secret which could be
read by applying pure thought to certain evidence, certain mystic clues
which God had laid about the world to allow a sort of philosopher’s
treasure hunt to this esoteric brotherhood… . He did read the riddle of
the heavens. And he believed that by the same powers of his
introspective imagination he would read the riddle of the Godhead,
the riddle of past and future events divinely foreordained, the riddle of
the elements and their constitution… .

In his audience, intently absorbing these words, aware of the cold and the
gloom and the seeming exhaustion of the speaker, was the young
Freeman Dyson. Dyson came to accept much of Keynes’s view of genius,
winnowing away the seeming mysticism. He made the case for magicians
in the calmest, most rational way. No “magical mumbo-jumbo,” he wrote. “I
am suggesting that anyone who is transcendentally great as a scientist is
likely also to have personal qualities that ordinary people would consider in
some sense superhuman.” The greatest scientists are deliverers and
destroyers, he said. Those are myths, of course, but myths are part of the
reality of the scientific enterprise.

When Keynes, in that Cambridge gloom, described Newton as a wizard,
he was actually pressing back to a moderate view of genius—for after the
eighteenth century’s sober tracts had come a wild turning. Where the first
writers on genius had noticed in Homer and Shakespeare a forgivable
disregard for the niceties of prosody, the romantics of the late nineteenth
century saw powerful, liberating heroes, throwing off shackles, defying God
and convention. They also saw a bent of mind that could turn fully
pathological. Genius was linked with insanity—was insanity. That feeling of
divine inspiration, the breath of revelation seemingly from without, actually
came from within, where melancholy and madness twisted the brain. The
roots of this idea were old. “Oh! how near are genius and madness!” Denis
Diderot had written. “… Men imprison them and chain them, or raise
statues to them.” It was a side effect of the change in focus from Godcenteredness to human-centeredness. The very notion of revelation, in the
absence of a Revealer, became disturbing, particularly to those who
experienced it: “… something profoundly convulsive and disturbing
suddenly becomes visible and audible with indescribable definiteness and
exactness,” Friedrich Nietzsche wrote. “One hears—one does not seek;
one takes—one does not ask who gives: a thought flashes out like
lightning… .” Genius now suggested Charles-Pierre Baudelaire or Ludwig
van Beethoven, flying off the tracks of normality. Crooked roads, William
Blake had said: “Improvement makes strait roads; but the crooked roads
without Improvement are roads of Genius.”

An 1891 treatise on genius by Cesare Lombroso listed some
associated symptoms. Degeneration. Rickets. Pallor. Emaciation. Left-

In 

jargon. 

handedness. A sense of the mind as a cauldron in tumult was emerging in
European culture, along with an often contradictory hodgepodge of psychic
terminology, all awaiting the genius of Freud to provide a structure and a
the meantime: Misoneism. Vagabondage.
coherent 
Unconsciousness. More presumed clues to genius. Hyperesthesia.
Amnesia. Originality. Fondness for special words. “Between 
the
physiology of the man of genius, therefore, and the pathology of the
insane,” Lombroso concluded, “there are many points of coincidence… .”
The genius, disturbed as he is, makes errors and wrong turns that the
ordinary person avoids. Still, these madmen, “despising and overcoming
obstacles which would have dismayed the cool and deliberate mind—
hasten by whole centuries the unfolding of truth.”

The notion never vanished; in fact it softened into a cliché. Geniuses
display an undeniable obsessiveness resembling, at times, monomania.
Geniuses of certain kinds—mathematicians, chess players, computer
programmers—seem, if not mad, at least lacking in the social skills most
easily identified with sanity. Nevertheless, the lunatic-genius-wizard did not
play as well in America, notwithstanding the relatively unbuttoned examples
of writers like Whitman and Melville. There was a reason. American genius
as the nineteenth century neared its end was not busy making culture,
playing with words, creating music and art, or otherwise impressing the
academy. It was busy sending its output to the patent office. Alexander
Graham Bell was a genius. Eli Whitney and Samuel Morse were geniuses.
Let European romantics celebrate the genius as erotic hero (Don Juan) or
the genius as martyr (Werther). Let them bend their definitions to
accommodate the genius composers who succeeded Mozart, with their
increasingly direct pipelines to the emotions. In America what newspapers
already called the machine age was under way. The consummate genius,
the genius who defined the word for the next generation, was Thomas Alva
Edison.

By his own description he was no wizard, this Wizard of Menlo Park.
Anyone who knew anything about Edison knew that his genius was ninetynine percent perspiration. The stories that defined his style were not about
inspiration in the mode of the Newtonian apple. They spoke of exhaustive,
laborious trial and error: every conceivable lamp filament, from human hair
to bamboo fiber. “I speak without exaggeration,” Edison declared (certainly

exaggerating), “when I say that I have constructed three thousand different
theories in connection with the electric light, each one of them reasonable
and apparently likely to be true.” He added that he had methodically
disproved 2,998 of them by experiment. He claimed to have carried out
fifty thousand individual experiments on a particular type of battery. He had
a classic American education: three months in a Michigan public school.
The essential creativity that led him to the phonograph, the electric light,
and more than a thousand other patented inventions was deliberately
played down by those who built and those who absorbed his legend.
Perhaps understandably so—for after centuries in which a rationalizing
science had systematically drained magic from the world, the machineshop inventions of Edison and other heroes were now loosing a magic with
a frightening, transforming power. This magic buried itself in the walls of
houses or beamed itself invisibly through the air.

“Mr. Edison is not a wizard,” reported a 1917 biography.
Like all people who have prodigiously assisted civilization, his

processes are clear, logical and normal.

Wizardry is the expression of superhuman gifts and, as such, is an

impossible thing… .

And yet, Mr. Edison can bid the voices of the dead to speak, and

command men in their tombs to pass before our eyes.

“Edison was not a wizard,” announced a 1933 magazine article. “If he
had what seems suspiciously like a magic touch, it was because he was
markedly in harmony with his environment… .” And there the explication of
Edisonian genius came more or less to an end. All that remained was to
ask—but few did—one of those impossible late-night what if questions:
What if Edison had never lived? What if this self-schooled, indefatigable
mind with its knack for conceiving images of new devices, methods,
processes had not been there when the flood began to break? The
question answers itself, for it was a flood that Edison rode. Electricity had
burst upon a world nearing the limits of merely mechanical ingenuity. The
ability to understand and control currents of electrons had suddenly made
possible a vast taxonomy of new machines—telegraphs, dynamos, lights,
telephones, motors, heaters, devices to sew, grind, saw, toast, iron, and
suck up dirt, all waiting at the misty edge of potentiality. No sooner had

Hans Christian Oersted noticed, in 1820, that a current could move a
compass needle than inventors—not just Samuel Morse but André-Marie
Ampère and a half-dozen others—conceived of telegraphy. Even more
people invented generators, and by the time enough pieces of technology
had accumulated to make television possible, no one inventor could
plausibly serve as its Edison.

The demystification of genius in the age of inventors shaped the
scientific culture—with its plainspoken positivism, its experiment-oriented
technical schools—that nurtured Feynman and his contemporaries in the
twenties and thirties, even as the pendulum swung again toward the more
mysterious, more intuitive, and conspicuously less practical image of
Einstein. Edison may have changed the world, after all, but Einstein
seemed 
it whole, by means of a single,
incomprehensible act of visualization. He saw how the universe must be
and announced that it was so. Not since Newton …

reinvented 

to have 

By then the profession of science was expanding rapidly, counting not
hundreds but tens of thousands of practitioners. Clearly most of their work,
most of science, was ordinary—as Freeman Dyson put it, a business of
“honest craftsmen,” “solid work,” “collaborative efforts where to be reliable
is more important than to be original.” In modern times it became almost
impossible to talk about the processes of scientific change without
echoing Thomas S. Kuhn, whose Structure of Scientific Revolutions so
thoroughly changed 
the discourse of historians of science. Kuhn
distinguished between normal science—problem solving, the fleshing out
of existing frameworks, the unsurprising craft that occupies virtually all
working 
intellectual
revolutions, 
upheavals through which knowledge lurches genuinely forward. Nothing in
Kuhn’s scheme required individual genius to turn the crank of revolutions.
Still, it was Einstein’s relativity, Heisenberg’s uncertainty, Wegener’s
continental drift. The new mythology of revolutions dovetailed neatly with
the older mythology of genius—minds breaking with the standard methods
and seeing the world new. Dyson’s kind of genius destroyed and
delivered. Schwinger’s quantum electrodynamics and Feynman’s may
have been mathematically the same, but one was conservative and the
other revolutionary. One extended an existing line of thought. The other
broke with the past decisively enough to mystify its intended audience.

researchers—and 

the vertiginous 

One represented an ending: a mathematical style doomed to grow fatally
overcomplex. The other, for those willing to follow Feynman into a new style
of visualization, served as a beginning. Feynman’s style was risky, even
megalomaniacal. Reflecting later on what had happened, Dyson saw his
own goals, like Schwinger’s, as conservative (“I accepted the orthodox
view … I was looking for a neat set of equations …”) and Feynman’s as
visionary: “He was searching for general principles that would be flexible
enough so that he could adapt them to anything in the universe.”

Other ways of seeking the source of scientific creativity had appeared. It
seemed a long way from such an inspirational, how-to view of discovery to
the view of neuropsychologists looking for a substrate, refusing to speak
merely about “mind.” Why had mind become such a contemptible word to
neuropsychologists? Because they saw the term as a soft escape route, a
deus ex machina for a scientist short on explanations. Feynman himself
learned about neurons; he taught himself some brain anatomy when trying
to understand color vision; but usually he considered mind to be the level
worth studying. Mind must be a sort of dynamical pattern, not so much
founded in a neurological substrate as floating above it, independent of it.
“So what is this mind of ours?” he remarked. “What are these atoms with
consciousness?”

Last week’s potatoes! They can now remember what was going
on in my mind a year ago—a mind which has long ago been
replaced… . The atoms come into my brain, dance a dance, and then
go out—there are always new atoms, but always doing the same
dance, remembering what the dance was yesterday.

Genius was not a word in his customary vocabulary. Like many
physicists he was wary of the term. Among scientists it became a kind of
style violation, a faux pas suggesting greenhorn credulity, to use the word
genius about a living colleague. Popular usage had cheapened the word.
Almost anyone could be a genius for the duration of a magazine article.
Briefly Stephen Hawking, a British cosmologist esteemed but not revered
by his peers, developed a reputation among some nonscientists as
Einstein’s heir to the mantle. For Hawking, who suffered from a
progressively degenerative muscular disease, the image of genius was

heightened by the drama of a formidable intelligence fighting to express
itself within a withering body. Still, in terms of raw brilliance and hard
accomplishment, a few score of his professional colleagues felt that he
was no more a genius than they.

In part, scientists avoided the word because they did not believe in the
concept. In part, the same scientists avoided it because they believed all
too well, like Jews afraid to speak the name of Yahweh. It was generally
safe to say only that Einstein had been a genius; after Einstein, perhaps
Bohr, who had served as a guiding father figure during the formative era of
quantum mechanics; after Bohr perhaps Dirac, perhaps Fermi, perhaps
Bethe … All these seemed to deserve the term. Yet Bethe, with no obvious
embarrassment or false modesty, would quote Mark Kac’s faintly
oxymoronic assessment that Bethe’s genius was “ordinary,” by contrast to
Feynman’s: “An ordinary genius is a fellow that you and I would be just as
good as, if we were only many times better.” You and I would be just as
good … Much of what passes for genius is mere excellence, the difference
a matter of degree. A colleague of Fermi’s said: “Knowing what Fermi
could do did not make me humble. You just realize that some people are
smarter than you are, that’s all. You can’t run as fast as some people or do
mathematics as fast as Fermi.”

In the domains of criticism that fell under the spell of structuralism and
then deconstructionism, even this unmagical view of genius became
suspect. Literary and music theory, and the history of science as well, lost
interest not only in the old-fashioned sports-fan approach—Homer versus
Virgil—but also in the very idea of genius itself as a quality in the
possession of certain historical figures. Perhaps genius was an artifact of
a culture’s psychology, a symptom of a particular form of hero worship.
Reputations of greatness come and go, after all, propped up by the
sociopolitical needs of an empowered sector of the community and then
slapped away by a restructuring of the historical context. The music of
Mozart strikes certain ears as evidence of genius, but it was not always so
—critics of another time considered it prissy and bewigged—nor will it
always be. In the modern style, to ask about his genius is to ask the wrong
question. Even to ask why he was “better” than, say, Antonio Salieri would
be the crudest of gaffes. A modern music theorist might, in his secret
heart, carry an undeconstructed torch for Mozart, might feel the old

damnably ineffable rapture; still he understands that genius is a relic of
outmoded romanticism. Mozart’s listeners are as inextricable a part of the
magic as the observer is a part of the quantum-mechanical equation. Their
interests and desires help form the context without which the music is no
more than an abstract sequence of notes—or so the argument goes.
Mozart’s genius, if it existed at all, was not a substance, not even a quality
of mind, but a byplay, a give and take within a cultural context.

How strange, then, that coolly rational scientists should be the last
serious scholars to believe not just in genius but in geniuses; to maintain a
mental pantheon of heroes; and to bow, with Mark Kac and Freeman
Dyson, before the magicians.
“Genius is the fire that lights itself,” someone had said. Originality;
imagination; the self-driving ability to set one’s mind free from the worn
channels of tradition. Those who tried to take Feynman’s measure always
came back to originality. “He was the most original mind of his generation,”
declared Dyson. The generation coming up behind him, with the
advantage of hindsight, still found nothing predictable in the paths of his
thinking. If anything he seemed perversely and dangerously bent on
disregarding standard methods. “I think if he had not been so quick people
would have treated him as a brilliant quasi-crank, because he did spend a
substantial amount of time going down what later turned out to be dead
ends,” said Sidney Coleman, a theorist who first knew Feynman at Caltech
in the fifties.

There are lots of people who are too original for their own good,
and had Feynman not been as smart as he was, I think he would have
been too original for his own good.

There was always an element of showboating in his character. He
was like the guy that climbs Mont Blanc barefoot just to show that it
can be done. A lot of things he did were to show, you didn’t have to do
it that way, you can do it this other way. And this other way, in fact, was
not as good as the first way, but it showed he was different.

Feynman continued to refuse to read the current literature, and he chided
graduate students who would begin their work on a problem in the normal
way, by checking what had already been done. That way, he told them, they

would give up chances to find something original. Coleman said:

I suspect that Einstein had some of the same character. I’m sure
Dick thought of that as a virtue, as noble. I don’t think it’s so. I think it’s
kidding yourself. Those other guys are not all a collection of yo-yos.
Sometimes it would be better to take the recent machinery they have
built and not try to rebuild it, like reinventing the wheel.

I know people who are in fact very original and not cranky but have
not done as good physics as they could have done because they were
more concerned at a certain juncture with being original than with
being right. Dick could get away with a lot because he was so
goddamn smart. He really could climb Mont Blanc barefoot.

Coleman chose not to study with Feynman directly. Watching Feynman
work, he said, was like going to the Chinese opera.

When he was doing work he was doing it in a way that was just—
absolutely out of the grasp of understanding. You didn’t know where it
was going, where it had gone so far, where to push it, what was the
next step. With Dick the next step would somehow come out of—
divine revelation.

So many of his witnesses observed the utter freedom of his flights of
thought, yet when Feynman talked about his own methods he emphasized
not freedom but constraints. The kind of imagination that takes blank
paper, blank staves, or a blank canvas and fills it with something wholly
new, wholly free—that, Feynman contended, was not the scientist’s
imagination. Nor could one measure imagination as certain psychologists
try to do, by displaying a picture and asking what will happen next. For
Feynman the essence of the scientific imagination was a powerful and
almost painful rule. What scientists create must match reality. It must match
what is already known. Scientific creativity, he said, is imagination in a
straitjacket. “The whole question of imagination in science is often
misunderstood by people in other disciplines,” he said. “They overlook the
fact that whatever we are allowed to imagine in science must be
consistent with everything else we know… .” This is a conservative
principle, implying that the existing framework of science is fundamentally

sound, already a fair mirror of reality. Scientists, like the freer-seeming
arts, feel the pressure to innovate, but in science the act of making
something new contains the seeds of paradox. Innovation comes not
through daring steps into unknown space,

not just some happy thoughts which we are free to make as we
wish, but ideas which must be consistent with all the laws of physics
we know. We can’t allow ourselves to seriously imagine things which
are obviously in contradiction to the known laws of nature. And so our
kind of imagination is quite a difficult game.

Creative artists in modern times have labored under the terrible weight of
the demand for novelty. Mozart’s contemporaries expected him to work
within a fixed, shared framework, not to break the bonds of convention. The
standard forms of the sonata, symphony, and opera were established
before his birth and hardly changed in his lifetime; the rules of harmonic
progression made a cage as unyielding as 
for
Shakespeare. As unyielding and as liberating—for later critics found the
creators’ genius in the counterpoint of structure and freedom, rigor and
inventiveness.

the sonnet did 

For the creative mind of the old school, inventing by pressing against
constraints that seem ironclad, subtly bending a rod here or slipping a lock
there, science has become the last refuge. The forms and constraints of
scientific practice are held in place not just by the grounding in experiment
but by the customs of a community more homogeneous and rule-bound
than any community of artists. Scientists still speak unashamedly of reality,
even in the quantum era, of objective truth, of a world independent of
human construction, and they sometimes seem the last members of the
intellectual universe to do so. Reality hobbles their imaginations. So does
the ever more intricate assemblage of theorems, technologies, laboratory
results, and mathematical formalisms that make up the body of known
science. How, then, can the genius make a revolution? Feynman said, “Our
imagination is stretched to the utmost, not, as in fiction, to imagine things
which are not really there, but just to comprehend those things which are
there.”

It was the problem he faced in the gloomiest days of 1946, when he was

trying to find his way out of the mire that quantum mechanics had become.
“We know so very much,” he wrote to his friend Welton, “and then subsume
it into so very few equations that we can say we know very little (except
these equations) … Then we think we have the physical picture with which
to interpret the equations.” The freedom he found then was a freedom not
from the equations but from the physical picture. He refused to let the form
of the mathematics lock him into any one route to visualization: “There are
so very few equations that I have found that many physical pictures can
give the same equations. So I am spending my time in study—in seeing
how many new viewpoints I can take of what is known.” By then Welton had
mastered the field theory that was becoming standard, and he was
surprised to discover that his old friend had not. Feynman seemed to
hoard shadow pools of ignorance, seemed to protect himself from the light
like a waking man who closes his eyes to preserve a fleeting image left
over from a dream. He said later, “Maybe that’s why young people make
success. They don’t know enough. Because when you know enough it’s
obvious that every idea that you have is no good.” Welton, too, was
persuaded that if Feynman had known more, he could not have innovated
so well.

“Would I had phrases that are not known, utterances that are strange, in
new language that has not been used, free from repetition, not an utterance
which has grown stale, which men of old have spoken.” An Egyptian scribe
fixed those words in stone at the very dawn of recorded utterance—already
jaded, a millennium before Homer. Modern critics speak of the burden of
the past and the anxiety of influence, and surely the need to innovate is an
ancient part of the artist’s psyche, but novelty was never as crucial to the
artist as it became in the twentieth century. The useful lifetime of a new
form or genre was never so short. Artists never before felt so much
pressure to violate such young traditions.

Meanwhile, before their eyes, the world has grown too vast and
multifarious for the towering genius of the old kind. Artists struggle to keep
their heads above the tide. Norman Mailer, publishing yet another novel
doomed to fall short of ambitions formed in an earlier time, notices: “There
are no large people any more. I’ve been studying Picasso lately and look
at who his contemporaries were: Freud, Einstein.” He saw the change in
his own lifetime without understanding it. (Few of those looking for genius

understood where it had gone.) He appeared on a literary scene so narrow
that conventional first novels by writers like James Jones made them
appear plausible successors to Faulkner and Hemingway. He slowly sank
into a thicket of hundreds of equally talented, original, and hard-driving
novelists, each just as likely to be tagged as a budding genius. In a world
into which Amis, Beckett, Cheever, Drabble, Ellison, Fuentes, Grass,
Heller, Ishiguro, Jones, Kazantzakis, Lessing, Nabokov, Oates, Pym,
Queneau, Roth, Solzhenitsyn, Theroux, Updike, Vargas Llosa, Waugh,
Xue, Yates, and Zoshchenko—or any other two dozen fiction writers—had
never been born, Mailer and any other potential genius would have had a
better chance of towering. In a less crowded field, among shorter
yardsticks, a novelist would not just have seemed bigger. He would have
been bigger. Like species competing in ecological niches, he would have
had a broader, richer space to explore and occupy. Instead the giants
force one another into specialized corners of the intellectual landscape.
They choose among domestic, suburban, rural, urban, demimondaine,
Third World, 
realist, postrealist, semirealist, antirealist, surrealist,
decadent, ultraist, expressionist, impressionist, naturalist, existentialist,
metaphysical, romance, romanticist, neoromanticist, Marxist, picaresque,
detective, comic, satiric, and countless other fictional modes—as sea
squirts, hagfish, jellyfish, sharks, dolphins, whales, oysters, crabs, lobsters,
and countless hordes of marine species subdivide the life-supporting
possibilities of an ocean that was once, for billions of years, dominated
quite happily by blue-green algae.

“Giants have not ceded to mere mortals,” the evolutionary theorist
Stephen Jay Gould wrote in an iconoclastic 1983 essay. “Rather, the
boundaries … have been restricted and the edges smoothed.” He was not
talking about algae, artists, or paleontologists but about baseball players.
Where are the .400 hitters? Why have they vanished into the mythic past,
when technical skills, physical conditioning, and the population on which
organized baseball draws have all improved? His answer: Baseball’s
giants have dwindled into a more uniform landscape. Standards have
risen. The distance between the best and worst batters, and between the
best and worst pitchers, has fallen. Gould showed by statistical analysis
that the extinction of the .400 hitter was only the more visible side of a
general softening of extremes: the .100 hitter has faded as well. The best

and worst all come closer to the average. Few fans like to imagine that
Ted Williams would recede toward the mean in the modern major leagues,
or that the overweight, hard-drinking Babe Ruth would fail to dominate the
scientifically engineered physiques of his later competitors, or that dozens
of today’s nameless young base-stealers could outrun Ty Cobb, but it is
inevitably so. Enthusiasts of track and field cannot entertain the baseball
fan’s nostalgia; their statistics measure athlete against nature instead of
athlete against athlete, and the lesson from decade to decade is clear.
There is such a thing as progress. Nostalgia conceals it while magnifying
the geniuses of the past. A nostalgic music lover will put on a scratchy 78
of Lauritz Melchior and sigh that there are no Wagnerian tenors any more.
Yet in reality musical athletes have probably fared no worse than any other
kind.

Is it only nostalgia that makes genius seem to belong to the past? Giants
did walk the earth—Shakespeare, Newton, Michelangelo, DiMaggio—and
in their shadows the poets, scientists, artists, and baseball players of today
crouch like pygmies. No one will ever again create a King Lear or hit safely
in fifty-six consecutive games, it seems. Yet the raw material of genius—
whatever combination of native talent and cultural opportunity that might be
—can scarcely have disappeared. On a planet of five billion people,
parcels of genes with Einsteinian potential must appear from time to time,
and presumably more often than ever before. Some of those parcels must
be as well nurtured as Einstein’s, in a world richer and better educated
than ever before. Of course genius is exceptional and statistics-defying.
Still, the modern would-be Mozart must contend with certain statistics: that
the entire educated population of eighteenth-century Vienna would fit into a
large New York apartment block; that in a given year the United States
Copyright Office registers close to two hundred thousand “works of the
performing arts,” from advertising jingles to epic tone poems. Composers
and painters now awake into a universe with a nearly infinite range of
genres to choose from and rebel against. Mozart did not have to choose
an audience or a style. His community was in place. Are the latter-day
Mozarts not being born, or are they all around, bumping shoulders with one
another, scrabbling for cultural scraps, struggling to be newer than new,
their stature inevitably shrinking all the while?

The miler who triumphs in the Olympic Games, who places himself

momentarily at the top of the pyramid of all milers, leads a thousand nextbest competitors by mere seconds. The gap between best and secondbest, or even best and tenth-best, is so slight that a gust of wind or a
different running shoe might have accounted for the margin of victory.
Where the measuring scale becomes multidimensional and nonlinear,
human abilities more readily slide off the scale. The ability to reason, to
compute, to manipulate the symbols and rules of logic—this unnatural
talent, too, must lie at the very margin, where small differences in raw talent
have enormous consequences, where a merely good physicist must stand
in awe of Dyson and where Dyson, in turn, stands in awe of Feynman.
Merely to divide 158 by 192 presses most human minds to the limit of
exertion. To master—as modern particle physicists must—the machinery
of group theory and current algebra, of perturbative expansions and nonAbelian gauge theories, of spin statistics and Yang-Mills, is to sustain in
one’s mind a fantastic house of cards, at once steely and delicate. To
manipulate that framework, and to innovate within it, requires a mental
power that nature did not demand of scientists in past centuries. More
physicists than ever rise to meet this cerebral challenge. Still, some of
them, worrying that the Einsteins and Feynmans are nowhere to be seen,
suspect that the geniuses have fled to microbiology or computer science—
forgetting momentarily that the individual microbiologists and computer
scientists they meet seem no brainier, on the whole, than physicists and
mathematicians.

Geniuses change history. That is part of their mythology, and it is the
final test, presumably more reliable than the trail of anecdote and peer
admiration that brilliant scientists leave behind. Yet the history of science is
a history not of individual discovery but of multiple, overlapping,
coincidental discovery. All researchers know this in their hearts. It is why
they rush to publish any new finding, aware that competitors cannot be far
behind. As the sociologist Robert K. Merton has found, the literature of
science is strewn with might-have-been genius derailed or forestalled
—“those countless footnotes … that announce with chagrin: ‘Since
completing this experiment, I find that Woodworth (or Bell or Minot, as the
case may be) had arrived at this same conclusion last year, and that Jones
did so fully sixty years ago.’” The power of genius may lie, as Merton
suggests, in the ability of one person to accomplish what otherwise might

have taken dozens. Or perhaps it lies—especially in this exploding,
multifarious, information-rich age—in one person’s ability to see his
science whole, to assemble, as Newton did, a vast unifying tapestry of
knowledge. Feynman himself, as he entered his forties, prepared to
undertake this very enterprise: a mustering and a reformulating of all that
was known about physics.

Scientists still ask the what if questions. What if Edison had not invented
the electric light—how much longer would it have taken? What if
Heisenberg had not invented the S matrix? What if Fleming had not
discovered penicillin? Or (the king of such questions) what if Einstein had
not invented general relativity? “I always find questions like that … odd,”
Feynman wrote to a correspondent who posed one. Science tends to be
created as it is needed.

“We are not that much smarter than each other,” he said.

Weak Interactions

By the late 1950s and early 1960s, as the discovery of new particles
became more commonplace, physicists found it harder to guess what
might and might not be possible. The word zoo entered their vocabulary,
and their scientific intuition sometimes seemed colored by a kind of
aesthetic queasiness. Weisskopf declared at one meeting that it would be
a shame if anyone found a particle with double charge. Oppenheimer
added that he personally would hate to see a strongly interacting particle
with spin greater than one-half. Both men were quickly disappointed.
Nature was not so fastidious.

The methods assembled under the label of field theory just a few years
before—direct computation of particle interactions, in the face of those
still-troubling infinities—fell out of favor with many. The success of quantum
electrodynamics did not extend easily to other particle realms. Of the four
fundamental forces—electromagnetism; gravity; the strong force binding
the atomic nucleus; and the weak force at work in radioactive beta decay
and in strange-particle decays—renormalization seemed to work only for
electromagnetism. With electromagnetism, the first, simplest Feynman
diagrams told most of the story. Mathematically the relative weakness of

the force expressed itself in the diminishing importance of more
complicated diagrams (for the same reason that the later terms in a series
like 1 + n + n2 + … vanish if n is 1/100). With the strong force, the forest of
Feynman diagrams made an unendingly large contribution to any
calculation. That made real calculations impossible. So where the more
esoteric forces were concerned, it seemed impossible to match the
success of quantum electrodynamics in making amazingly precise
dynamical predictions. Instead, symmetries, conservation laws, and
quantum numbers provided abstract principles by which physicists could at
least organize the experimentalists’ data. They looked for patterns,
organized taxonomies, filled in holes. A diverging branch of mathematical
physicists continued to pursue field theory, but most theorists now found it
profitable to sift through particle data—the data now arriving in huge
volume—looking for general principles. Searching for symmetries meant
not tying oneself to the microscopic dynamics of particle behavior. It came
to seem almost immoral, or at least silly, for a theorist to write down a
specific dynamic or scale.

The understanding of symmetry also became an understanding of
symmetry’s imperfections, for, as symmetry laws came to dominate, they
also began to break down. One of the most obvious of all symmetries led
the way: the symmetry of left and right. Humans seem mostly symmetrical,
but not perfectly so. The symmetry is “broken,” as a modern physicist
would say, by an off-center heart and liver and by more subtle or superficial
differences. We learn to break the symmetry ourselves by internalizing an
awareness of the difference between left and right, although sometimes
this is not so easy. Feynman himself confessed to a group gathered
around the coffee pot in a Caltech laboratory that even now he had to look
for the mole on the back of his left hand when he wanted to be sure. As
early as his MIT fraternity days he had puzzled over the classic teaser of
mirror symmetry: why does a mirror seem to invert left and right but not top
and bottom? That is, why are the letters of a book backward but not upside
down, and why would Feynman’s double behind the mirror appear to have
a mole on his right hand? Was it possible, he liked to ask, to give a
symmetrical explanation of what a mirror does—an explanation that treats
up-and-down no differently from left-and-right? Many logicians and
scientists had debated this conundrum. There were many explanations,

some of them correct. Feynman’s was a model of clarity.

Imagine yourself standing before the mirror, he suggested, with one
hand pointing east and the other west. Wave the east hand. The mirror
image waves its east hand. Its head is up. Its west hand lies to the west. Its
feet are down. “Everything’s really all right,” Feynman said. The problem is
on the axis running through the mirror. Your nose and the back of your
head are reversed: if your nose points north, your double’s nose points
south. The problem now is psychological. We think of our image as
another person. We cannot imagine ourselves “squashed” back to front, so
we imagine ourselves turned left and right, as if we had walked around a
pane of glass to face the other way. It is in this psychological turnabout that
left and right are switched. It is the same with a book. If the letters are
reversed left and right, it is because we turned the book about a vertical
axis to face the mirror. We could just as easily turn the book from bottom to
top instead, in which case the letters will appear upside down.

Our own asymmetries—our blemishes, hearts, handednesses—arise
from contingent choices nature made in the process of building up
complicated organisms. A preference for right or left appears in biology all
the way down to the level of organic molecules, which can be right- or lefthanded. Sugar molecules have this intrinsic corkscrew property. Chemists
can make them with either handedness, but bacteria digest only “righthanded” sugar, and that is the kind that sugar beets produce. Earthly sugar
beets, that is—for evolution might just as well have chosen a left-handed
pathway, just as the industrial revolution might have settled on left-threaded
rather than right-threaded screws.

On still smaller scales, at the level of elementary particle interactions,
physicists assumed that nature would not distinguish between right and
left. It seemed inconceivable that the laws of physics would change with
mirror reflection, any more than they change when an experiment is
conducted at a different place or a different time. How could anything so
featureless as a particle embody the handedness of a corkscrew or a golf
club? Right-left symmetry had been built into quantum mechanics in the
form of a quantity called parity. If a given event conserved parity, as most
physicists consciously or unconsciously assumed it must, then its outcome
did not depend on any left-right orientation. Conversely, if nature did have
some kind of handedness built into its guts, then an experimenter might be

able to find events that did not conserve parity. When Murray Gell-Mann
was a graduate student at MIT, a standard problem in one course was to
derive the conservation of parity by mathematical logic, transforming
coordinates from left-handed to right-handed. Gell-Mann spent a long
weekend transforming coordinates back and forth without proving anything.
He recalled telling the instructor that the problem was wrong: that the
conservation of parity was a physical fact that depended on the structure of
a particular theory, not on any inescapable mathematical truth.

lifetimes seem 

their masses and 

Parity became an issue in theorists’ unease about the liveliest
experimental problem coming out of the accelerators in 1956: the problem
of the theta and the tau, two strange particles (strange in Gell-Mann’s
sense). It was typical of the difficulties physicists were having in making
taxonomical sense of the jumble of accelerator data. When the theta
decayed, a pair of pions appeared. When the tau decayed, it turned into
three pions. In other ways, however, the tau and the theta were beginning
to look suspiciously similar. Data from cosmic rays and then accelerators
made 
indistinguishable. One
experimenter had plotted thirteen data points in 1953. By the time the
1956 Rochester conference convened, he had more than six hundred data
points, and the theorists were trying to face the obvious: perhaps the tau
and the theta were one and the same. The problem was parity. A pair of
pions had even parity. A trio of pions had odd parity. Assuming that a
particle’s decay conserved parity, a physicist had to believe that the tau
and the theta were different. Intuitions were severely tested. Sometime
after the Rochester conference ended, Abraham Pais wrote a note to
himself: “Be it recorded here that on the train back from Rochester to New
York, Professor Yang and the writer each bet Professor Wheeler one dollar
that the theta- and tau-meson are distinct particles; and that Professor
Wheeler has since collected two dollars.”

Everyone was making bets. An experimenter asked Feynman what
odds he would give against an experiment testing for the unthinkable,
parity violation, and Feynman was proud later that he had offered a mere
fifty to one. He actually raised the question at Rochester, saying that his
roommate there, an experimenter named Martin Block, had wondered why
parity could not be violated. (Afterward Gell-Mann teased him mercilessly
for not having asked the question in his own name.) Someone had joked

nervously about considering even wild possibilities with open minds, and
the official note taker recorded:

Pursuing the open mind approach, Feynman brought up a
question of Block’s: Could it be that the [theta] and [tau] are different
parity states of the same particle which has no definite parity, i.e., that
parity is not conserved. That is, does nature have a way of defining
right- or left-handedness uniquely?

Two young physicists, Chen Ning Yang and Tsung Dao Lee, said they had
begun looking into this question without reaching any firm conclusions. So
desperately did the participants dislike the idea of parity violation that one
scientist proposed yet another unknown particle, this time one that
departed the scene with no mass, no charge, and no momentum—just
carrying off “some strange space-time transformation properties” like a
sanitation worker carting away trash. Gell-Mann rose to suggest that they
keep their minds open to the possibility of other, less radical solutions.
Discussion continued until, as the note taker put it, “The chairman”—
Oppenheimer—“felt that the moment had come to close our minds.”

But in Feynman’s tentative question the answer had emerged. Lee and
Yang undertook an investigation of the evidence. For electromagnetic
interactions and strong interactions, the rule of parity conservation had a
real experimental and theoretical foundation. Without parity conservation, a
well-entrenched framework would be torn apart. But that did not seem to
be true for weak interactions. They went through an authoritative text on
beta decay, recomputing formulas. They examined the recent experimental
literature of strange particles. By the summer of 1956 they realized that, as
far as the weak force was concerned, parity conservation was a freefloating assumption, bound neither to any experimental result nor to any
theoretical rationale. Furthermore, it occurred to them that Gell-Mann’s
conception of strangeness offered a precedent: a symmetry that held for
the strong force and broke down for the weak. They quickly published a
paper formally raising the possibility that parity might not be conserved by
weak interactions and proposing experiments to test the question. By the
end of the year, a team led by their Columbia colleague Chien Shiung Wu
had set one of them up, a delicate matter of monitoring the decay of a

radioactive isotope of cobalt in a magnetic field at a temperature close to
absolute zero. Given an up and down defined by the alignment of the
magnetic coil, the decaying cobalt would either spit out electrons
symmetrically to the left and right or would reveal a preference. In Europe,
awaiting the results, Pauli joined the wagerers: he wrote Weisskopf, “I do
not believe that the Lord is a weak left-hander, and I am ready to bet a very
large sum that the experiments will give symmetric results.” Within ten days
he knew he was wrong, and within a year Yang and Lee had received one
of the quickest Nobel Prizes ever awarded. Although physicists still did not
understand it, they appreciated the import of the discovery that nature
distinguished right from left in its very core. Other symmetries were
immediately 
implicated—the correspondence between matter and
antimatter, and the reversibility of time (if the film of an experiment were run
backwards, for example, it might look physically correct except that right
would be left and left would be right). As one scientist put it, “We are no
longer trying to handle screws in the dark with heavy gloves. We are being
handed the screws neatly aligned on a tray, with a little searchlight on each
that indicates the direction of its head.”

Feynman made an odd presence at the high-energy physicists’
meetings. He was older than the bright young scientists of Gell-Mann’s
generation, younger than the Nobel-wielding senators of Oppenheimer’s.
He neither withdrew from the discussions nor dominated them. He showed
a piercing interest in the topical issues—as with his initial prodding on the
question of parity—but struck younger physicists as detached from the
newest ideas, particularly in contrast to Gell-Mann. At the 1957 Rochester
conference it occurred to at least one participant that Feynman himself
should have applied his theoretical talents to the question he had raised a
year earlier, instead of leaving the plum to Yang and Lee. (The same
participant noticed a revisionists’ purgatory in the making: theorists from
Dirac to Gell-Mann “busy explaining that they personally had never thought
parity was anything special,” and experimenters recalling that they had
always meant to get around to an experiment like Wu’s.) Publicly, Feynman
was as serene as ever. Privately, he agonized over his inability to find the
right problem. He wanted to stay clear of the pack. He knew he was not
keeping up with even the published work of Gell-Mann and other highenergy physicists, yet he could not bear to sit down with the journals or

preprints that arrived daily on his desk and piled up on his shelves and
merely read them. Every arriving paper was like a detective novel with the
last chapter printed first. He wanted to read just enough to understand the
problem; then he wanted to solve it his own way. Almost alone among
physicists, he refused to referee papers for journals. He could not bear to
rework a problem from start to finish along someone else’s track. (He also
knew that when he broke his own rule he could be devastatingly cruel. He
summarized one text by writing, “Mr. Beard is very courageous when he
gives freely so many references to other books, because if a student ever
did look at another book, I am sure he would not return again to continue
reading Beard,” and then urged the editor to keep his review confidential
—“for Mr. Beard and I are good personal friends.”) His persistently
iconoclastic approach to other people’s work offended even theorists
whom he meant to compliment. He would admire what they considered a
peripheral finding, or insist on what struck them as a cockeyed or baroque
alternative viewpoint. Some theorists strived to collaborate with colleagues
and to set a tone and an agenda for whole groups. Gell-Mann was one.
Feynman seemed to lack that ambition—though a generation of physicists
now breathed Feynman diagrams. Still, he was frustrated.

He sometimes confided in his sister, Joan, who had begun a career in
science herself, getting a doctorate in solid-state physics at Syracuse
University. She was still living in Syracuse, and Feynman visited her when
he went to Rochester. He complained to her that he could not work. She
reminded him of all the recent ideas that he had shared with her and then
refused to pursue long enough to write a paper. You’ve done it again and
again, she said. You told me that Block might be right. And you don’t do
a damn thing about it. You should write it up, for crying out loud, when
you have something like this. She also reminded him that he had
mentioned an idea for a universal theory of weak interactions—tying
together beta decay and the strange-particle decays based on the weak
force—and urged him, finally, to see where it would lead.

In its classic form, beta decay turns a neutron into a proton, throwing off
an electron and another particle, a neutrino—massless, chargeless, and
hard to detect. Charge is conserved: the neutron has none; the proton
carries + 1 and the electron – 1. Analogously, in the meson family, a pion
could decay into a muon (like a heavy electron) and a neutrino. A good

theory would predict the rates of decay in such processes, as well as the
energies of the outgoing particles. There were complications. The spins of
the particles had to be reconciled, and for the massless neutrinos,
especially, problems of handedness arose in calculating the appropriate
spins. So the new understanding of parity violation immediately changed
the weak-interaction landscape—for Feynman, for Gell-Mann, and for
others.

In sorting the various kinds of particle interactions, theorists had created
a classification scheme with five distinct transformations of one wave
function into another. In one sense it was a classification of the
characteristic algebraic techniques; in another, it was a classification of
the types of virtual particles that arose in the interactions, according to their
possible spins and parities. As shorthand, physicists used the labels S, T,
V, A, and P, for scalar, tensor, vector, axial vector, and pseudoscalar. The
different kinds of weak interaction had evident similarities, but this
classification scheme posed a problem. As Lee pointed out at the 1957
Rochester meeting, most experiments on beta decay had demonstrated S
and T interactions, while the new parity-violation experiments tended to
suggest that meson decay involved V and A. Under the circumstances, the
same physical laws could hardly be at work.

In reading Lee and Yang’s preprint for the meeting—Joan had ordered
him, for once, to sit down like a student and go through it step by step—
Feynman saw an alternative way of formulating the violation of parity. Lee
and Yang described a restriction on the spin of the neutrino. He liked the
idea enough to mention it from the audience during five minutes cadged
from another speaker. He went far back into the origins of quantum
mechanics—back not only to the Dirac equation itself but beyond, to the
Klein-Gordon equation that he and Welton had manufactured when they
were MIT undergraduates. Using path integrals, he moved forward again,
deriving—or “discovering”—an equation slightly different from Dirac’s. It
was simpler: a 
four
components. “Now I asked this question,” Feynman said:

two-component equation, where Dirac’s had 

Suppose that historically [my equation] had been discovered
before the Dirac equation? It has absolutely the same consequences
as the Dirac equation. It can be used with diagrams the same way.

The diagrams for beta decay, of course, added a neutrino field interacting
with the electron field. When Feynman made the necessary change to his
equation, he found:

Of course I can’t do that because this term is parity unsymmetric.

But——beta decay is not parity symmetric, so it’s now possible.

There were two difficulties. One was that he came out with the opposite
sign for the spin: his neutrino would have to spin in the opposite direction
from Lee and Yang’s prediction. The other was that the coupling in his
formulation would have to be V and A, instead of the S and T that everyone
knew was correct.

Gell-Mann, meanwhile, had also thought about the problem of creating a
theory for weak interactions. Nor were Feynman and Gell-Mann alone:
Robert Marshak, who had put forward the original two-meson idea at the
Shelter Island conference in 1947, was also leaning toward V and A with a
younger physicist, E. C. G. Sudarshan. That summer, with Feynman
traveling in Brazil, Marshak and Sudarshan met with Gell-Mann in
California and described their approach.

Feynman returned at the end of the summer determined, for once, to
catch up with the experimental situation and follow his weak-interaction
idea through to the end. He visited Wu’s laboratory at Columbia, and he
asked Caltech experimenters to bring him up to date. The data seemed a
shambles—contradictions everywhere. One of the Caltech physicists said
that Gell-Mann even thought the crucial coupling could be V rather than S.
That, as Feynman often recalled afterward, released a trigger in his mind.

I flew out of the chair at that moment and said, “Then I understand
everything. I understand everything and I’ll explain it to you tomorrow
morning.”

They thought when I said that, I’m making a joke… . But I didn’t
make a joke. The release from the tyranny of thinking it was S and T
was all I needed, because I had a theory in which if V and A were
possible, V and A were right, because it was a neat thing and it was

pretty.

Within days he had drafted a paper. Gell-Mann, however, decided that he
should write a paper, too. As he saw it, he had his own reasons for
focusing 
to be universal.
Electromagnetism depended on vector coupling, and the strange particles
favored V and A. He was unhappy that Feynman seemed to be
thoughtlessly dismissing his ideas.

and A. He wanted 

theory 

on V 

the 

Before the tension between them rose higher, their department head,
Robert Bacher, stepped in and asked them to write a joint paper. He
preferred not to see rival versions of the same discovery coming out of
Caltech’s physics group. Colleagues strained to overhear Feynman and
Gell-Mann in the corridors or at a cafeteria table, engrossed in their oral
collaboration. They stimulated each other despite the characteristic
differences in their language: Feynman offering what sounded like you
take this and it zaps through here and you come out and pull this
together like that, Gell-Mann responding with you substitute there and
there and integrate like so… . Their article reached the Physical Review
in September, days before Marshak presented his and Sudarshan’s
similar theory at a conference in Padua, Italy. Feynman and Gell-Mann’s
theory went further in several influential respects. It proposed a bold
extension of the underlying principles beyond beta decay to other classes
of particle interactions; it would be years before experiment fully caught up,
showing how prescient the two men had been. It also introduced the idea
that a new kind of current—analogous to electrical current, a measure of
the flow of charge—should be conserved; new extensions of the concept of
current became a central tool of high-energy physics.

Feynman tended to recall that they had written the paper together. GellMann sometimes disdained it, complaining particularly about the twocomponent formalism—a ghastly notation, he felt. It did bear Feynman’s
stamp. He was applying a formulation of quantum electrodynamics that
went back to his first paper on path integrals in 1948; Gell-Mann allowed
him to remark fondly, “One of the authors has always had a predilection for
this equation.” Yet it could hardly have been Feynman who wrote that their
approach to parity violation “has a certain amount of theoretical raison
d’être.” Evident, too, was Gell-Mann’s drive to make the theory as unifying

and forward-looking as possible. The discovery was esoteric compared to
other milestones of modern physics. If Feynman, Gell-Mann, Marshak, or
Sudarshan had not made it in 1957, others would have soon after. Yet to
Feynman it was as pure an achievement as any in his career: the unveiling
of a law of nature. His model had always been Dirac’s magical discovery
of an equation for the electron. In a sense Feynman had discovered an
equation for the neutrino. “There was a moment when I knew how nature
worked,” he said. “It had elegance and beauty. The goddamn thing was
gleaming.” To other physicists, “Theory of the Fermi Interaction,” barely six
pages long, shone like a beacon in the literature. It seemed to announce
the beginning of a powerful collaboration between two great and
complementary minds. They took a distinctive kind of theoretical high
ground, repeatedly speaking of universality, of simplicity, of 
the
preservation of symmetries, of broad future applications. They worked
from general principles rather than particular calculations of dynamics.
They made clear predictions about new kinds of particle decay. They listed
specific experiments that contradicted their theory and declared that the
experiments must therefore be wrong. Nothing could have more strikingly
declared the supremacy of the theorists.

Toward a Domestic Life

The two-piece “bikini” bathing suit, named after the tiny Pacific atoll that
was blasted by atomic and hydrogen bombs through the forties and fifties,
had not yet taken over the beaches of the United States in 1958, but
Feynman saw one, blue, on the sand of Genève-Plage, and laid his beach
towel down nearby. He was visiting Geneva for a United Nations
conference on the peaceful uses of atomic energy. He was preparing to
give a summary talk in his own name and Gell-Mann’s, telling the
assembly:

We are well aware of the fragility and incompleteness of our
present knowledge and of the manifold of speculative possibilities… .
What is the significance or the pattern behind all these interrelated
symmetries, partial symmetries, and asymmetries?

The yearly Rochester conference had also changed venue for the
occasion, and he discussed the weak-interaction theory, impressing
listeners with the body language he used to demonstrate the appropriate
spins and handednesses. He had just turned forty. It was spring, and the
young woman in the blue bikini volunteered that Lake Geneva was cold.
“You speak English!” he said. She was Gweneth Howarth, a native of a
village in Yorkshire, England. She had left home to see Europe by working
as an au pair. That evening he took her to a nightclub.

The violation of parity had reached newspapers and magazines briefly.
For readers who looked to science for a general understanding of the
nature of the universe, the fall of left-right symmetry may have been the last
genuinely meaningful lesson to emerge from high-energy physics,
circumscribed though it was in the domain of certain very short-lived
particle interactions. By contrast, though the universal theory of weak
interactions commandeered the attention of theorists and experimenters a
year later, the replacement of S and T with V and A made no ripple in the
cultural consciousness. By then the American public was busy anyway,
assimilating the most shocking scientific development of the 1950s, the
piece of news establishing once again in the public mind the truism that
science is power.

The beachball-sized aluminum sphere called Sputnik began orbiting the
earth on October 4, 1957. Its unexpected presence overhead and the
insouciant beep-beep-beep played again and again on American radio
and television broadcasts set off a wave of anxiety like nothing since the
atomic bomb itself. (Feynman arrived at a picnic that evening in the
biologist Max Delbrück’s backyard with a small gray radio receiver that
looked as if he had built it himself. He called for an extension cord, tuned
the receiver quickly, held up a finger to demand silence, and grinned as the
beeps played out over the crowd.) “Red Moon over U.S.,” said Time
magazine, immediately announcing “a new era in history” and “a grim new
chapter in the cold war.” Newsweek called it “The Red Conquest”—with “all
the mastery that it implies in the affairs of men on earth.” Why had the
United States established no comparable space program? A worriedlooking President Eisenhower said at a news conference, “Well, let’s get
this straight. I am not a scientist.” The director of the American Institute of

Physics seized the occasion to say that unless his country’s science
education caught up with the Soviet Union’s, “our way of life is doomed.”
That message was heard: Sputnik produced a rapid new commitment to
the teaching of science. Magazines focused new attention on American
physicists. Among the younger generation, Time singled out Feynman—

Curly-haired and handsome, he shuns neckties and coats, is an
enormously dedicated adventurer … became fascinated with samba
rhythms … playing bongo drums, breaking codes, picking locks …

and Gell-Mann—

he formulated the “Strangeness Theory,” i.e. assigned physical
meanings to the behavior of newly discovered particles. At CalTech
Gell-Mann works closely with Feynman on weak couplings. At the
blackboard the two explode with ideas like sparks flying from a
grindstone, alternately slap 
foreheads at each other’s
their 
simplifications, quibble over the niceties.

But the physicist who received most of the public’s attention that fall was
Edward Teller. He was in tune with the cold war. Sputnik led him to declare
—though there was evidence to the contrary—“Scientific and technical
leadership is slipping from our hands.” A direct Soviet attack on the United
States was possible, but he saw an even greater threat. “I do not think this
is the most probable way in which they will defeat us,” he said. He
predicted that the Soviet Union would gain a broad technological
dominance over the free world. “They will advance so fast in science and
leave us so far behind that their way of doing things will be the way, and
there will be nothing we can do about it.”

With the winter’s excitement barely waning—the Reader’s Digest had
now faced into the wind with an article titled “No Time for Hysteria”—a
State Department official let Caltech know that the department would
appreciate a presentation at the Geneva conference in the name of both
Feynman and Gell-Mann, to balance the expected Soviet scientific
presence there. Feynman acquiesced, although the mixing of propaganda
and science disturbed him.

He declined to let the State Department make his hotel reservation; he
found a walk-up room in an establishment called, in English, Hotel City. It
reminded him of the flophouses he had known in Albuquerque and on his
cross-country trip with Freeman Dyson. He had hoped to bring a woman
with whom he had been having a sporadic and tempestuous yearlong love
affair—the wife of a research fellow. She had accompanied him on a trip
the summer before, when he was working on weak interactions. Now she
agreed to meet him afterward in England but refused to come to Geneva.
Instead, he met Gweneth Howarth on the beach.

She told him she was making her way around the world. She was twentyfour years old, the daughter of a jeweler in a town called Ripponden. She
had worked as a librarian for a salary of three pounds weekly and then as
a yarn tester at a cotton mill before deciding life in the backwaters of
Yorkshire was too dull. She let Feynman know that she had two current
boyfriends, a semiprofessional miler from Zurich, always in training, and a
German optician from Saarbrücken. He immediately invited her to come to
California and work for him. He needed a maid, he said. He would sponsor
her with the immigration authorities and pay her twenty dollars a week. It
seemed to her that he was not behaving like a forty-year-old; nor like other
Americans she had met. She said she would consider it, and an unusual
courtship began.

“I’ve decided to stay here after all,” she wrote him that fall. One of the
boyfriends, Johann, had decided to marry her—out of jealousy, she
suspected—

so you see what a good turn you did for me… . we talked for hours
and hours, planning our life together. We shall probably start married
life living in one room… . Were you really expecting me to come? …
You’ll just have to get married again, or find a nice solid middle-aged
housekeeper so people won’t gossip.

His love affairs were going badly, meanwhile. That same week a letter
arrived from the other woman, making it clear that their relationship was
over. She demanded money—five hundred dollars—“I will be frank, the
chances of your getting it all back within a year are nil.” She had asked for
money before, saying that she needed it for an abortion, but now she said

that that had been a ruse. His money had actually gone for furniture and
house painting.

You were too much of the “playboy.” But I was both embarrassed &
intrigued by the effects that your girl friends had on you when they
called you in my presence. Sometimes you left the phone, shaking &
foaming at the mouth… . I recognized a baseness in you and was
frightened that you took my love and affection for you cheaply, and so I
wanted to compensate against that horrible feeling.

She knew too much about the women he had been seeing since his
divorce. She named four of them and described an anonymous note that
had come addressed to “Occupant”:

Dirty Dick, Filthy Fucking Feynman dates you. He will never marry
you. Tell him he has made you pregnant. You’ll make a quick $300–
$500.

She had been devastated by nasty physicist-gossip she had overheard
about Feynman and his women, Feynman and “the pox.” He should get
married, she said.

The baseness you talk of is due to the fact you aren’t married. You
try to sublimate your desires by attending Burlesque Shows, Night
Clubs, etc. These are fun for the healthy, but only an escape for the
dissatisfied. I know this, because last year you were content in Rio, &
as a result produced Beta Decay… .

Find yourself a real companion, someone you can really love &

respect. Then capture love whilst it is fresh & spontaneous… .

At some point she had walked off with the gold medal he had received with
the Einstein Award. She still had it, she reminded him.

Feynman implored Gweneth Howarth to reconsider. By November, as it
happened, she and Johann were no longer on speaking terms and she
had begun the immigration paperwork through the United States
Consulate in Zurich. He consulted a lawyer, who warned that there were
dangers in transporting women for immoral purposes and advised him to

find a third-party employer; a Caltech friend, Matthew Sands, agreed to
lend his name on the required documents. Feynman calculated fares
(more than a year’s salary for a Yorkshire librarian, she noticed): $394.10
to Los Angeles; or $290.10 to New York and then $79.04 including tax for
a bus from New York to Los Angeles.

She was excited but unsure. “You’ll write & tell me if you decide to get
married again, or if there is any other reason why I should not come?” She
wanted him to realize she had other possibilities—Armando, whom she
met skiing, or a fellow who had been watching her at language class (“he
walked part of the way home with me … I’d like it to be a platonic
friendship, but I don’t suppose he will want it like that …”) and yet there
were always hints of the domestic future Feynman so craved now—she
was caring for “a beautiful baby now, I wish I could have one exactly like
him.” A new friend, Engelbert, was buying skis for her; meanwhile she
could now cook pheasant, chicken, goose, and hare with the appropriate
sauces (“I’m improving, am I not?”). Feynman kept hearing from the other
woman, too. She was telling her husband everything; they had left
California for the East Coast. She wanted more money. She felt used. He
let her know how angry he was. She told him, “altho’ you are clever at your
own special work, you are very dim at human relationships.” She assured
him that his Einstein Award medal was “safe”; also his copy of the
Rubáiyát of Omar Khayyám, with drawings that had been carefully colored,
so long ago, by Arline.

He begged her to come see him again. “I only mentioned my inner
feelings for revenge, etc. to explain why it would be hard to guarantee you
something that you asked,” he wrote. He still wanted to marry her.

I know where the right is—but emotions, like anger and hate and
vengeance etc. are like a bunch of snakes in a barrel—with reason
and good heart as a lid… . it is frightening and uncertain. Worth a
good try tho.

She refused, despite the warm memories that now came back to her:
building a sandcastle at the beach, surrounded by a mob of small boys;
camping under the stars at Joshua Tree National Monument, where
Feynman had tinkered delightedly with his gleaming green Coleman stove.

On a wet Sunday night he had shown her a battered suitcase with all of
Arline’s letters and photographs. Once in a flash of anger he had called her
a prostitute—a cruel rhetorical weapon he had used before. “And,” she
wrote, “I did enjoy my boss & my work.”

Her husband’s memories were not so warm. At a party he listened to
someone telling a story about Feynman and blurted out that he knew a
better one—but stopped. A few days later he wrote Feynman a formal
letter demanding compensation. “You have taken callous & unscrupulous
advantage of your position & salary to seduce an impressionable girl away
from her husband,” he wrote. Could Feynman not remember the harder
times of his own first marriage? “You alienated my wife’s affections. You
flattered her with your attentions and your gifts. You made clandestine
plans for exciting vacations… . I think you should pay for indulging your
selfish pleasure.” He demanded $1,250. Feynman refused.

Gweneth Howarth was reporting that Engelbert had brought cognac and
chocolate to celebrate her twenty-fifth birthday; she decided to improve her
shorthand and typing (“You do need someone to look after you, don’t
you?”). Feynman sent the consulate in Zurich an affidavit vouching for her
(“she is an intelligent girl with a fine personality and is an excellent cook
and domestic servant”) and guaranteeing to undertake her financial
support if necessary. Gweneth thanked him, mentioning that she had now
met an Arab boy, beautifully polite, but he had started to make love to her.
She had to avoid Engelbert because she could not hide a love bite on her
neck. She was making her way through the immigration paperwork: pages
of questions designed to ensure that she was not a Communist and then—
infuriating her—questions about whether she was a woman of good
character where sex was concerned. From what moral high ground—and
with what bureaucratic logic—did the American authorities require her to
swear that she was neither a prostitute nor an adulterer?

Feynman, meanwhile, tried to placate his former lover’s husband: “…
forgive her and make her happy… . your love will be deeper for the
forgiveness and greater because you each know how you have suffered.”

“Good thought,” the husband retorted, “but why don’t you apply it to
yourself since you have enjoyed her for so long… . Don’t give me the story
of your parents’ teachings, society etc. for I don’t go for that.” He engaged
attorneys, who sent threatening letters on his behalf. But Feynman’s

attorneys advised him not to settle, guessing that the matter would fade
away on its own. The last word belonged to his lover.

I hope you are happy with your maid. Now you will always have
your sex laid on. I think I begin to understand what you mean by a
“good relationship.” … But I can’t understand why you are so afraid of
marriage? Is it too dull for you? I thought think sex without love wasn’t
isn’t very satisfying, that the satisfaction only came by both parties
desiring the happiness of the other, given in complete faith, truth &
love without reserve. Anything short of that, I thought, was lust or
fucking like animals.—Perhaps that is why you have such a large turnover with your women.

A half-year later she finally returned his medal.

He surprised Gweneth with his excitement at the news that her visa had
finally cleared the consulate. “Well, at last!” he wrote. “I was overjoyed to
hear that you are coming at last.”

I need you more than ever… . I’m looking forward to being much
happier… . I have to take care of you too, you know. As soon as you
arrive here you are a responsibility of mine to see you are happy & not
scared.

He had pared back the domestic side of daily life in minimalist fashion,
striving for the least drain on his consciousness. When Gweneth Howarth
finally arrived in the summer of 1959 she found a man with five identical
pairs of shoes, a set of dark blue serge suits, and white shirts that he wore
open at the neck. (She surreptitiously introduced colored shirts in
deliberate stages, beginning with the palest of pastels.) He owned neither
a radio nor a television. He carried pens in a standard slip-in shirt-pocket
protector. He taught himself to keep keys, tickets, and change always in
the same pocket so that he would never have to give them an instant’s
thought.

At first he kept her presence secret from all but a few close colleagues.
She took charge of the household as promised. He reveled in his pretty
English domestic servant. He taught her to drive and experimented with
letting her drive him about chauffeur-style, while he sat in the rear seat. She

worried that he thought she was fluffy-minded; in fact he discovered that
she was cool and independent. She made a point of finding men to date—
a Beverly Hills stockbroker replaced the German optician—but Feynman’s
friends gradually realized that their arrangement was turning romantic.
They would appear at parties together and then make a show of departing
separately, as though they had different places to go. Sometime in the next
spring he realized how contented he felt, but he was not sure how to make
the next decision. He marked a date on the calendar several weeks ahead
and told himself that if his feelings had not changed by then, he would ask
Gweneth to marry him. As the day approached, he could hardly wait. The
evening before, without telling her why, he kept her awake until midnight.
Then he proposed. They were married on September 24, 1960, at
Pasadena’s grand Huntington Hotel. He hid his car so that no one could tie
tin cans to the fenders, and moments after the reception he ran out of
gasoline on the Pasadena Freeway. He told Gweneth cheerfully: So this is
how we’re starting 
life. Murray Gell-Mann, who had married an
Englishwoman he met at the Institute for Advanced Study several years
before, thought Feynman was playing catch-up—now he, too, had acquired
an English wife and a small brown dog.

The Feynmans and the Gell-Manns bought houses not far from each
other in Altadena, north of the campus, nestled in the high hills that cup the
smog drifting up from Los Angeles. Richard spent long hours teaching the
dog, Kiwi, increasingly circuitous tricks; Feynman’s mother, who had
moved out to Pasadena to be near her son, made droll remarks about
what a child would be up against. Gweneth began a garden with citrus
scents and exotic colors that could never have survived a Yorkshire winter.
In 1962 a son, Carl, was born; six years later they adopted a daughter,
Michelle. It was instantly clear to Richard’s friends how much he had
wanted children. At first Murray and his wife, Margaret, visited from time to
time, and the friendship was never warmer. An image lodged in GellMann’s memory of his friend pitching wads of newspaper into the fireplace
for kindling, one after another—and making an ebullient game of it, as he
made a game of every mundane gesture. The dog bounded here and there
at his command, and he called out happily to Gweneth, and Murray felt
magic in his presence.

From QED to Genetics

“Hello, my sweetheart,

“Murray and I kept each other awake arguing until we could stand it no

longer. We woke up over Greenland …”

They were off to Brussels together for a conference, partly nostalgic, on
“the present state of quantum electrodynamics.” Dirac was there, and
Feynman spoke once again with his old hero—Dirac still wholly
unreconciled to the renormalization program for evading the infinities that
had plagued his old theory. Renormalization seemed an ugly gimmick, an
arbitrary and unphysical device for merely discarding inconvenient
quantities in one’s equations. To most physicists Dirac’s qualms sounded
like the intolerance of the old in the face of new ideas—in this case ideas
that succeeded where Dirac’s own theory had broken down. He reminded
them of Einstein, with his famous crotchety unwillingness to accept
quantum mechanics, and like Einstein he could hardly be dismissed.
Honest physicists at least understood his qualms, even if they attributed
them, ultimately, to a generational hardening of the intuitions. Age was no
friend of the physicist. Wisdom counted for nothing. Feynman was acutely
and painfully aware of the truth expressed in a ditty sometimes attributed to
Dirac himself; it appeared from time to time, over the years, on Caltech
office doors:

Age is, of course, a fever chill

That every physicist must fear.
He’s better dead than living still
When once he’s past his thirtieth year.

Feynman also sympathized with Dirac’s qualms about renormalization,
more so than any of his coinventors of the modern methods. Quantum
electrodynamics had become a singular triumph of theoretical physics. The
computations that had taken Feynman and Schwinger hours or weeks to
accomplish in their first and second approximations could now be
extended to many deeper levels of accuracy, using electronic computers
and hundreds of Feynman diagrams to organize the work. Some theorists
and their graduate students spent years on these calculations. They added

and subtracted hundreds of terms, deeper and deeper into infinite series. It
struck some of them as bizarrely unsatisfying work: some of the terms
were enormous, positive or negative, compared to the final result. Yet
presumably they would cancel out in the end, leaving a small, finite number.
The mathematical status of such computation remained uneasy. It was not
mathematically certain that the calculations would converge. Yet for
practical calculations in quantum electrodynamics they always seemed to,
and when the increasingly precise results were compared with the results
of increasingly sensitive experiments, they matched. To convey a sense of
how “delicately” experiment and theory agreed, Feynman would say it was
like measuring the distance from New York to Los Angeles to within the
thickness of a single hair. Yet the unphysical nature of the computing
process troubled him, the corrections upon corrections with no sense of
whether the next correction must be large or small. “We have been
computing terms like a blind man exploring a new room,” he said in his
keynote talk in Brussels.

to 

that 

fruitful 

it might be 

first recognized 

Other theorists, meanwhile, had begun to use the very concept of
“renormalizability” as a way of distinguishing between possible theories for
the esoteric particles to which quantum electrodynamics did not apply.
Dyson had 
think of
renormalizability this way, as a criterion for judgment. A renormalizable
theory was one by which, practically speaking, calculations could be made.
“Note the cunning of reason at work,” said the physicist and historian
Silvan S. Schweber. “The divergences 
that had previously been
considered a disastrous liability now became a valuable asset.” Gell-Mann
and younger theorists applied the notion with real success. “We very much
need a guiding principle like renormalizability to help us pick the quantum
field theory of the real world out of the infinite variety of conceivable
quantum field theories,” said Steven Weinberg years later—recognizing,
however, that he was begging the question of why? Why should the correct
theories be the computable ones? Why should nature make matters easy
for human physicists? Feynman himself remained nearly as uncomfortable
as Dirac. He continued to say that renormalization was “dippy” and “a shell
game” and “hocus-pocus.”

By the 1960s he seemed to be withdrawing from the most esoteric
frontiers of high-energy physics. Quantum electrodynamics had achieved

the quiet stature of a solved problem. As a practical theory it had entered
applied, solid-state fields like electrical engineering, where, for example,
quantum mechanics gave rise to the maser, a device for creating intense
beams of coherent radiation, and its successor, the laser. Feynman drifted
into the theory of masers for a while, using his path integral methods to lay
some of the foundation. He had also worked persistently on another solid
state problem, the problem of the so-called polaron, an electron moving
through a crystal lattice. The electron distorts the lattice and interacts with
its own cloud of distortion, creating, as Feynman realized, a kind of case
study for examining the interaction of a particle with its field. Again his
diagrams and path integrals found fertile ground. Yet this was minor work,
not the special outpouring of someone already regarded as a legend
(though each fall, it seemed, younger men won the Nobel Prize).

He could not find the right problem to work on. His Caltech salary
passed the twenty-thousand-dollar mark—he was the highest paid
member of the faculty. He started telling people jovially that that was a lot of
money to be paid for theoretical physics; it was time to do some real work.
He had a sabbatical year coming. He did not want to travel. His friend Max
Delbrück, himself a physicist turned geneticist, was always trying to lure
physicists into his group at Caltech, saying that the interesting questions
now lay in molecular biology. Feynman told himself that he would go into a
different field instead of a different country.

In biology the theorists and the laboratory workers were still largely one
and the same. Feynman began in the summer of 1960 by learning how to
grow strains of bacteria on plates, how to suck drops of solution into
pipettes, how to count bacteriophages—viruses that infect bacteria—and
how to detect mutations. He planned experiments at first to teach himself
the techniques. Much of Delbrück’s laboratory devoted itself to the
genetics of such microcreatures: tiny, efficient DNA-replicating machines.
The most popular virus when Feynman arrived in the upper basement of
Church Hall was a bacteriophage called T4, which grew on the common
strain of E. coli bacteria.

Less than a decade had passed since James Watson and Francis
Crick had elucidated the structure of DNA, the molecule that carried the
genetic code. Code was one word for this storing of information;
geneticists also thought in terms of maps and blueprints, printed text and

recording tape—the mechanics were far from clear. Mutations were known
to be changes in the DNA sequence, but no one understood how a
developing organism actually “read” the altered map, text, or tape. Was
there a biological copying, splicing, folding? Feynman began to feel at
home in the basement laboratory. He took comfort from the knowledge that
everything around was made of matter. He felt well acquainted with the
essence of evaluating experiments—as he said, “understanding when a
thing is really known and when it is not really known.” He could see at once
how the centrifuge worked and how ultraviolet absorption would show how
much DNA remained in a test tube. Biology was messier—things grew
and wiggled, and he found it difficult to repeat experiments as exactly as
he wished.

He focused on a particular mutation of the T4 virus called rII. This mutant
had the useful quality of growing abundantly on one strain of the E. coli
bacteria, strain B, while not growing at all on strain K. So a researcher
could infect strain K bacteria with the mutants and watch for signs of T4. If
any appeared, it must mean that something had happened to the rII
mutation—presumably, it had reverted back to its original form. Such
“backmutation” was relatively rare, but when it happened, giving the virus
the ability to grow again in the K bacteria, it could be detected with
extreme sensitivity, rates as low as one in a billion. Feynman compared
finding a T4 backmutation to finding one man in China with elephant ears,
purple spots, and no left leg. He collected them, isolated them, and
injected them back into bacteria of strain B to see how they would grow.

Odd-looking plaques appeared. Among the normal, backmutated T4, he
began to see phages that did not grow as they should have. He called
them “idiot r’s.” He could only guess what might be happening at the level
of the DNA itself to create the idiot r’s. He saw two possibilities: the site of
the rII mutation in the DNA strand might have undergone a second, further
mutation. Or a second mutation might have occurred at a different site,
somehow acting to partially cancel the effect of the first mutation.

Tools for directly examining the genetic sequence, letter by letter, base
pair by base pair, did not exist. But by painstakingly crossing the idiot r’s
with the original virus, Feynman was able to show that his second guess
was correct: two mutations, situated close to each other on the gene, were
interacting. Furthermore, he showed that the second mutation had the

same character as the first; it was another rII mutation. He had discovered
a new phenomenon, mutations that suppressed each other within the same
gene. Friends of his in the laboratory called these “Feyntrons” and tried to
persuade him to write up his work for publication. Elsewhere, discovered
independently, the phenomenon came to be called intragenic suppression.
Feynman could not explain it. The Caltech biologists had no clear model
for understanding how the genetic code was read, how the information
encoded in DNA actually transformed itself into working proteins and more
complex organisms. And Feynman’s time as a geneticist had come to an
end. He desperately wanted to return to physics. When he was not grinding
microsomes, he had been working more and more intently on a quantum
theory of gravity.

Without realizing it, Feynman had come to the brink of the next great
breakthrough in modern genetics. The specialists had an advantage after
all: a year later, Francis Crick’s team at Cambridge, England, used the
discovery of intragenic suppression as the touchstone for an explanation of
how the genetic code was read. They guessed, correctly, that the
mutations actually added or deleted a unit of DNA, thus shifting the
message back or forward. One mutation threw the message temporarily
out of phase; the next mutation put it back in phase. This interpretation
suggested—or perhaps Crick already had it in mind—one of the simplest,
yet strangest, mechanical models for genetic decoding: that the message
of the gene is read in linear fashion, one base pair after another, from
beginning to end. By 1966 Crick was declaring, “The story of the genetic
code is now essentially complete.”

Ghosts and Worms

its 

relativity neared 

fiftieth anniversary, some 

The problem of gravity had the finest pedigree—it came in a direct line of
descent from Einstein’s greatest work—yet it lay outside the mainstream
of high-energy theoretical physics in the early 1960s. As the general theory
of 
relativists and
mathematical physicists continued to struggle with the natural problem of
trying to create a quantum theory of gravitation—to quantize the
gravitational field, as the fields associated with other forces had been
quantized. It was difficult, involuted work. A quantum field theory of
Einsteinian gravitation meant, as Gell-Mann said, a “quantum mechanical
smearing of space-time” itself. No experimental evidence demanded that
gravity must be quantized, but physicists did not wish to imagine a world in
which some fields obeyed the laws of quantum mechanics and others did
not.

The difficulty, from an experimentalist’s perspective, was that gravity was
so weak compared to the other forces. A bare handful of electrons can
create a palpable electromagnetic force, while it takes a mass as great as
the earth to create the gravity that draws a leaf from a tree. The orders of
magnitude separating these forces strain the imagination and cause
immense mathematical difficulties for theorists trying to reconcile them.
The difference is 1042, a number that defied even Feynman’s ability to find
illustrative analogies. “The gravitational force is weak,” he said at one
conference, introducing his work on quantizing gravity. “In fact, it’s damned
weak.” At that instant a loudspeaker demonically broke loose from the
ceiling and crashed to the floor. Feynman barely hesitated: “Weak—but not
negligible.”

He had begun with Einstein’s theory and simply started calculating, as
he had done in electrodynamics. He pushed his way into different corners
of the problem in original fashion. The late 1950s were a time when
relativity specialists were confused about the nature of gravitational
radiation, and the high levels of mathematical rigor they demanded were
blocking them from the right approximations. To Feynman it seemed
straightforward that gravitational waves were real. Once again he began

with a palpable physical intuition and charged forward. He found answers
—decisive, he believed—to questions that relativists argued about: Do
gravity waves carry energy? (Yes, he showed.) Can gravity waves be
detected by small-scale measurements inside the wavelength? (No, he
argued. “Only beyond the wave length can a clear proof of waves be
found,” he wrote Victor Weisskopf when he heard that his old friend was
interested in his gravity work. “I have not seen any plans for any such
experiments, except by crackpots.”) For the sake of argument, at least, he
refused to abandon altogether the possibility that gravity could not be
quantized after all. “Maybe gravity is a way that quantum mechanics fails at
large distances. Isn’t it interesting to live in our time and have such
wonderful puzzles to work on?” He wrote down Feynman diagrams and
computed integrals, and he could see that he was producing answers that
could not be right. The probabilities did not add up to one. Yet he realized
—with a combination of physical and diagrammatic intuition—that he could
make up the deficits all at once if he resorted to a gimmick. He had to add
“ghosts,” fictitious particles that would circle around the Feynman
diagrams, appearing just long enough to form loops and then vanishing
once more into mathematical oblivion. It was a curious idea, but it worked,
and he reported it in Warsaw, Poland, at a conference on gravitation in
July 1962.

The subject was on the eve of a rebirth, when discoveries from
astrophysicists and theories from relativists would come together in a
shower of black holes, white dwarfs, quasars, and other cosmological
treasures. Feynman himself continued his gravitational work for years. He
applied the gauge-symmetry machinery known as Yang-Mills. He made an
influential contribution without ever reaching a complete enough theory to
publish whole. For the moment, he found no more joy in a gathering of
relativists than in the conclaves on high-energy physics he was temporarily
fleeing. One of the speakers began seriously: “Since 1916 we have had a
slow, rather painful accumulation of minute technical improvements… . I
think that the attempt to continue obtaining such minute improvements
constitutes a legitimate and fascinating part of mathematical physics. If
something really exciting turns up, fine… .” The American physicists
mingled uneasily with their Russian counterparts. They teased each other
about searching their rooms for microphones; Feynman actually took apart

his telephone at the Grand Hotel and decided that if it contained no bugs
the Poles were wasting wire. He was overheard during a break baiting one
of the Russians: “What have you ever done in physics, Ivanenko?”

“I’ve written a book with Sokolov.”
“How do I know what you contributed to it? Ivanenko, what is the integral
of e to the minus x squared from minus to plus infinity?” Silence. “Ivanenko,
what is one and one?” Feynman was dismayed by the work offered up. His
own presentation drew little immediate notice, though his “ghosts,”
extended by other theorists, later became crucial to modern theory. “I am
learning nothing,” he wrote home in frustration, and he gave Gweneth a
scathing taxonomy of pretentious science:

The “work” is always: (1) completely un-understandable, (2) vague
and indefinite, (3) something correct that is obvious and self-evident,
worked out by a long and difficult analysis, and presented as an
important discovery, or (4) a claim based on the stupidity of the author
that some obvious and correct fact, accepted and checked for years
is, in fact, false (these are the worst: no argument will convince the
idiot), (5) an attempt to do something, probably impossible, but
certainly of no utility, which, it is finally revealed at the end, fails or (6)
just plain wrong. There is a great deal of “activity in the field” these
days, but this “activity” is mainly in showing that the previous “activity”
of somebody else resulted in an error or in nothing useful or in
something promising.

He never had liked crowds in science. “It is like a lot of worms trying to

get out of a bottle by crawling all over each other.”

Dissatisfied though Feynman remained, his Warsaw talk marked the
beginning of a turn toward his path integrals as a fundamental approach to
the deepest of cosmological issues. Neither he nor other theorists had
relied on this viewpoint in the high-energy physics of the late 1950s. Much
later, however, some physicists applied path integrals to the very structure
of space-time. They sought to unify its conceivable topologies by, in a
sense, summing over all possible universes. Gell-Mann himself speculated
that Feynman’s path integrals might prove to be more than a method, more
than an equivalent alternative formulation: “the real foundation of quantum

mechanics and thus of physical theory.”

Room at the Bottom

So little of modern physics seemed dedicated to the world of human
scales. High-energy theorists had skipped far down a ladder of sizes, past
the merely microscopic into a realm of the unimaginably small and shortlived. “Miniaturization” was a catchword of the day, but tininess meant
something more modest to engineers and manufacturers than to particle
physicists. The transistor, invented just over a decade before at the Bell
Telephone Laboratories, was becoming a commodity. Transistors meant
radios, battery-powered, with brittle plastic casings, small enough to fit in
one’s hand. Researchers were beginning to consider ways of further
reducing suitcase-sized devices like tape recorders. Electronic computers
that had filled large rooms could now be squeezed into cabinets barely
larger than an automobile. It occurred to Feynman that engineers had
barely begun to imagine the possibilities. “There is a device on the market,
they tell me,” he said at the end of 1959, when the American Physical
Society held its annual meeting at Caltech, “by which you can write the
Lord’s Prayer on the head of a pin. But that’s nothing… .” On toward the
atom, he urged them. “It is a staggeringly small world that is below.”

That same pinhead could hold the twenty-four volumes of 
the
Encyclopaedia Britannica, pictures and all, if the encyclopedia were
reduced 25,000 times in each direction. A modest reduction, considering
that the barely visible dots making up a halftone photoengraving would still
contain a thousand or so atoms. For writing and reading this tiny
Britannica, he proposed engineering techniques within the limits of
contemporary technology: reversing the lenses of an electron microscope,
for example, and focusing a beam of ions to a small spot. At this scale, the
world’s entire store of book knowledge could be carried about in a small
pamphlet. But direct reduction would be crude, he continued. Telephones
and computers had given rise to a new way of thinking about information,
and in terms of raw information—allowing six or seven “bits” per letter and
a generous one hundred atoms per bit—all the world’s books could be
written in a cube no larger than a speck of dust. His audience,

unaccustomed to lectures of this kind at American Physical Society
meetings, was enthralled. “Don’t tell me about microfilm!” Feynman
declared.

He had several reasons for thinking about the mechanics of the atomic
world. Although he did not say so, he had been pondering the second law
of thermodynamics and the relationship between entropy and information;
at atomic scales came the threshold where his calculations and thought
experiments took place. The new genetics also brought such issues to the
surface. He talked about DNA (fifty atoms per bit of information) and about
the capacity of living organisms to build tiny machinery, not just for
information storage but for manipulation and manufacturing. He talked
about computers: given millions of times more power, they would not just
calculate faster but would reveal qualitatively different abilities, such as the
ability to make judgments. “There is nothing I can see in the physical laws
that says the computer elements cannot be made enormously smaller than
they are now,” he said. He talked about problems of lubrication, and he
talked about the realm where quantum-mechanical laws would take over.
He envisioned machines that would make smaller machines, each of which
would make machines that were smaller still. “It doesn’t cost anything for
materials, you see. So I want to build a billion tiny factories, models of each
other, which are manufacturing simultaneously, drilling holes, stamping
parts, and so on.” He concluded by offering a pair of one-thousand-dollar
prizes: one for the first microscope-readable book page shrunk 25,000
times in each direction, and one for the first operating electric motor no
larger than a 1/64th-inch cube.

Caltech’s magazine Engineering and Science printed Feynman’s talk,
and it was widely reprinted elsewhere. (Popular Science Monthly retitled it
“How to Build an Automobile Smaller than This Dot.”) Twenty years later
there was a name for the field Feynman had been trying to invent:
nanotechnology. Nanotechnologists, partly inspired and partly crackpot,
made tiny silicon gears with carefully etched teeth and displayed them
proudly in their microscopes; or imagined tiny self-replicating robot doctors
that would swim through one’s arteries. They thought of Feynman as their
spiritual father, although he himself never returned to the subject. In the
crude mechanical sense, tiny machines seemed a feature of a future just
as distant as in 1959. The mechanical laws of physics meant that friction,

viscosity, and electrical forces did not scale down as neatly as Feynman’s
imagined billion tiny factories. Wheels, gears, and levers tended to glue
themselves together. Tiny machines had come into being, storing and
manipulating information even more efficiently than he had predicted. But
they were electronic, not mechanical, using quantum mechanics, not
fighting it. Not until 1985 did Feynman have to pay the thousand dollars for
tiny writing: a Stanford University graduate student, Thomas H. Newman,
spent a month shrinking the first page of A Tale of Two Cities onto silicon
by almost exactly the technique Feynman had outlined.

The tiny motor did not take so long. Feynman had underestimated
existing technology. A local engineer, William McLellan, read the
Engineering and Science article in February. By June, when he had not
heard any more, he decided he had better make the motor himself. It took
two months of working in his spare time, using a watchmaker’s lathe and a
microdrill press, drilling invisible holes and wrapping 1/2000th-inch copper
wire. Tweezers were too crude. McLellan used a sharpened toothpick. The
result was a one-millionth-horsepower motor.

One day in November he visited Feynman, who was working alone in a
Caltech laboratory. McLellan brought his equipment in a large wooden box.
He saw Feynman’s eyes glaze; too many cranks had turned up, typically
bringing toy automobile engines that they could hold in the palm of a hand.
But McLellan opened his box and pulled out a microscope.

“Uh-oh,” Feynman said. He had neglected to make any arrangements for

funding the prize. He sent McLellan a personal check.

All His Knowledge

He could not let go of the simple questions. He had spent much of a
lifetime assembling a picture of how the world worked, how atoms and
forces conjoined to create ice crystals and rainbows. In conjuring a world of
miniature machines, he continued to work out possibilities at the level of
long-lived molecules, not ephemeral strange particles. He had made
himself a member of the community of theoretical physics, and he
accepted their goals and their rhetoric: he had told the American Physical
Society apologetically that miniaturization was not “fundamental physics (in

the sense of, ‘What are the strange particles?’).” Indeed, his community
now assigned a kind of intellectual primacy to phenomena that could be
observed only in the searing less-than-an-instant of a particle collision. But
a part of him still preferred to give fundamental a different definition. “What
we are talking about is real and at hand: Nature,” he wrote to a
correspondent in India, who had, he thought, spent too much time reading
about esoteric phenomena.

Learn by trying to understand simple things in terms of other ideas
—always honestly and directly. What keeps the clouds up, why can’t I
see stars in the daytime, why do colors appear on oily water, what
makes the lines on the surface of water being poured from a pitcher,
why does a hanging lamp swing back and forth—and all the
innumerable little things you see all around you. Then when you have
learned what an explanation really is, you can then go on to more
subtle questions.

The first plank in every Caltech undergraduate education was a two-year
required course in basic physics. By the 1960s the institute administration
recognized a problem. The course had grown stale. Too much ancient
pedagogy lingered in it. Bright young freshmen arrived from their high
schools around the country, ready to tackle the mysteries of relativity and
strange particles, and were plunged into the study of—as Feynman put it
—“pith balls and inclined planes.” There was no main lecturer; the course
met in sections taught by graduate students. The administration decided in
1961 to revise the course from the bottom up and asked Feynman to take
it on for one year. He would have to lecture twice a week.

Caltech was not alone; nor was physics. The pace of change in modern
science had accelerated as most college syllabuses had hardened. It was
no longer possible, as it had been a generation before, to bring
undergraduates up to the live frontier of a field like physics or biology. Yet if
quantum mechanics or molecular genetics could not be integrated into
undergraduate education, science risked becoming a historical subject.
Many first-year physics courses did begin with history: physics in ancient
Greece; the pyramids of Egypt and the calendars of Sumeria; medieval
physics through nineteenth-century physics. Virtually all began with some

form of mechanics. A typical program went:

1. Historical Development of Physical Science
2. Present Status of Physical Science
3. Kinematics: The Study of Motion
4. The Laws of Dynamics
5. Application of the Laws of Motion: Momentum and Energy
6. Elasticity and Simple Harmonic Motion
7. Dynamics of Rigid Bodies
8. Statics of Rigid Bodies

and so on, until in its final weeks the course would reach

26. Atoms and Molecules

in time to touch upon Nuclear Physics and Astrophysics. Caltech was still
using a generation-old text by its own luminary, Robert Millikan, that
remained soundly mired in the physics of the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries.

Feynman began with atoms, because that was where his own
understanding of the world began—not the world of quantum mechanics
but the quotidian world of floating clouds and colors shimmering in oily
water. Moments after nearly two hundred freshmen entered the hall for his
first lecture in the fall of 1961, they heard these words from the grinning
physicist striding back and forth upon the stage:

So, what is our over-all picture of the world?
If, in some cataclysm, all of scientific knowledge were to be
destroyed, and only one sentence passed on to the next generation of
creatures, what statement would contain the most information in the
fewest words? I believe it is the atomic hypothesis (or the atomic fact,
or whatever you wish to call it) that all things are made of
atoms—little particles that move around in perpetual motion,
attracting each other when they are a little distance apart, but
repelling upon being squeezed into one another. In that one
sentence, you will see, there is an enormous amount of information
about the world, if just a little imagination and thinking are applied.

Imagine a drop of water, he said. He took them on a tour inward through
the length scales, magnifying the drop until it was forty feet across, then
fifteen miles across, then 250 times larger still, until the teeming molecules
came into view, each with a pair of hydrogen atoms stuck like round arms
upon a larger oxygen atom. He discussed the contrary forces holding the
molecules together and forcing them apart. He described heat as atoms in
motion … pressure … expansion … steam. He described ice, with its
molecules held in a rigid crystalline array. He described the surface of
water in air, absorbing oxygen and nitrogen and giving off vapor, and he
immediately raised issues of equilibrium and disequilibrium. Instead of
Aristotle and Galileo, instead of levers and projectiles, he was building a
tangible sense of how atoms create the substances around us and why
substances behave as they do. Solution and precipitation, fire and odor—
he kept moving, displaying the atomic hypothesis not as a reductive end
point but as a road toward complexity.

If water—which is nothing but these little blobs, mile upon mile of
the same thing over the earth—can form waves and foam, and make
rushing noises and strange patterns as it runs over cement; if all of
this, all the life of a stream of water, can be nothing but a pile of atoms,
how much more is possible? … Is it possible that the “thing” walking
back and forth in front of you, talking to you, is a great glob of these
atoms in a very complex arrangement … ? When we say we are a pile
of atoms, we do not mean we are merely a pile of atoms, because a
pile of atoms which is not repeated from one to the other might well
have the possibilities which you see before you in the mirror.

He found that he was working harder than at any time since the atomic
bomb project. Teaching was only one of his goals. He realized also that he
wished to organize his whole embracing knowledge of physics, to turn it
end over end until he could find all the interconnections that were usually,
he believed, left as loose ends. He felt as though he were making a map. In
fact, for a while he considered actually trying to draw one, a diagram—a
“Guide to the Perplexed,” as he put it.

A team of Caltech physics professors and graduate students scrambled
to keep up, week after week, designing problem sets and supplementary

material, as his guide to the perplexed took shape. They met with him at
lunch after each lecture to piece together what Feynman had spun from as
little as a single sheet of cryptic notes. Despite the homespun lyricism of
his voice, the stress on ideas rather than technique, he was moving
quickly, and his fellow physicists had to work to keep up with some of his
leaps.

As every physics course recapitulated the subject’s history, so did
Feynman’s, but instead of surveying the Sumerians or the Greeks he
chose—in his second lecture—to sum up “Physics before 1920.” Less
than a half-hour later he was on to a quick tour of quantum physics and then
the nuclei and the strange particles according to Gell-Mann and Nishijima.
This was what many students wanted to hear. Yet he did not want to leave
them with the easy sense that here, at the microlevels, lay the most
fundamental laws or the deepest unanswered questions. He described
another problem, crossing the artificial boundaries that divide scientific
disciplines, “not the problem of finding new fundamental particles, but
something left over from a long time ago.”

It is the analysis of circulating or turbulent fluids. If we watch the
evolution of a star, there comes a point where we can deduce that it is
going to start convection, and thereafter we can no longer deduce
what should happen… . We cannot analyze the weather. We do not
know the patterns of motions that there should be inside the earth.

No one knew how to derive this chaos from the first principles of atomic
forces or fluid flow. Simple fluid problems were for textbooks, he told the
freshmen.

What we really cannot do is deal with actual, wet water running
through a pipe. That is the central problem which we ought to solve
some day.

Feynman designed his lectures as self-contained dramas. He never
wanted to end by saying, “Well, the hour is up, we will continue this
discussion next time …” He timed his diagrams and equations to fill the
sliding two-tier blackboard so definitively that an image of the final chalk
tableau seemed to have been in his head from the start. He chose grand

tentacles 

that spread 

themes with 
into every corner of science:
Conservation of Energy; Time and Distance; Probability … Before a month
was out he introduced the deep and timely issue of symmetry in physical
laws. His approach to the conservation of energy was revealing. This
principle was never far from the consciousness of a working theoretical
physicist, yet most textbooks let it arise in passing, toward the end of
chapters on mechanical energy or thermodynamics. First they would note
that mechanical energy is not conserved, since friction inevitably drains it
away. Not until the Einsteinian equivalence of matter and energy does the
principle fully come into its own.

Feynman took the conservation of energy as a starting point for
discussing conservation laws in general (as a result, his syllabus managed
to introduce the conservation of charge, baryons, and leptons weeks
before reaching the subject of speed, distance, and acceleration). He put
forward an ingenious analogy. Imagine, he said, a child with twenty-eight
blocks. At the end of every day, his mother counts them. She discovers a
fundamental law, the conservation of blocks: there are always twenty-eight.
One day she sees only twenty-seven, but careful investigation reveals
one under the rug. Another day she finds twenty-six—but a window is open,
and two are outside. Then she finds twenty-five—but there is a box in the
room, and upon weighing the box and weighing individual blocks she
surmises that three blocks are inside. The saga continues. Blocks vanish
beneath the dirty water of a bathtub, and further calculations are needed to
infer the number from the rising water level. “In the gradual increase in the
complexity of her world,” Feynman said, “she finds a whole series of terms
representing ways of calculating how many blocks are in places where she
is not allowed to look.” One difference, he warned: in the case of energy,
there are no blocks—just a set of abstract and increasingly intricate
formulas which must always, in the end, return the physicist to his starting
point.

With 

large 

the vivid analogies and 

immediately came
computation. In the same one-hour lecture on the conservation of energy,
Feynman had his students calculating potential and kinetic energy in a
gravitational field. A week later, when he introduced the uncertainty
principle of quantum mechanics, he not only conveyed the philosophical
drama of this “inherent fuzziness” in the description of nature but also leapt

themes 

through the calculation of the probability density of an undisturbed
hydrogen atom. He still had not reached the basics of speed, distance,
and acceleration.

No wonder his colleagues found their nerves jangling as they tried to
write problem sets. Before a half-year was gone, he was teaching an
uncompromising version of the geometry of relativistic space-time,
complete with particle diagrams, geometrical transformations, and fourvector algebra. For college freshmen this was difficult. Along with the
mathematics Feynman tried to convey a feeling for how he visualized such
problems, placing his “brain” into his diagrams like Alice plunging through
the Looking-Glass. He tried to make his students imagine the apparent
width and depth of an object:

They depend upon how we look at it; when we move to a new
position, our brain immediately recalculates the width and the depth.
But our brain does not immediately recalculate coordinates and time
when we move at high speed, because we have had no effective
experience of going nearly as fast as light to appreciate the fact that
time and space are also of the same nature.

The students were sometimes terrified. Yet Feynman also returned to
the standard fare of an introductory physics course. When he covered
centers of mass and spinning gyroscopes, experienced physicists realized
that he was giving the students not just the mathematical methods but also
original, physical understanding. Why does a spinning top stand upright on
your fingertip and then, as gravity pulls its axis downward, slowly circle
about? Even physicists felt they were learning the why for the first time
when they heard Feynman explain that the gyroscope began by “falling” an
invisibly small distance … (He did not want to leave the students thinking a
gyroscope was a miracle: “It is a wonderful thing, but it is not a miracle.”)

No realm of science was out of bounds. After consulting with experts in
other fields, he gave two lectures on the physiology of the eye and the
physiochemistry of color vision, making a profound connection between
psychology and physics. He described the view of time and fields that
arose from advanced and retarded potentials, his graduate work with
Wheeler. He delivered a special lecture on the principle of least action,

beginning with his high-school memories of his teacher Mr. Bader—how
does a ball know what path to follow?—and ending with least action in
quantum mechanics. He devoted an entire lecture to one of the simplest of
mechanical gadgets, the ratchet and pawl, the sawtoothed device that
keeps a watch spring from unwinding—but it was a lesson in reversibility
and irreversibility, in disorder and entropy. Before he was done he had
linked the macroscopic behavior of the ratchet and pawl to the events
occurring at the level of its constituent atoms. The history of one ratchet
was also the thermodynamic history of the universe, he showed:

The ratchet and pawl works in only one direction because it has
some ultimate contact with the rest of the universe… . Because we
cool off the earth and get heat from the sun, the ratchets and pawls
that we make can turn one way… . It cannot be completely understood
until the mystery of the beginnings of the history of the universe are
reduced still further from speculation to scientific understanding.

The course was a magisterial achievement: word was spreading through
the scientific community even before it ended. But it was not for freshmen.
As the months went on, the examination results left Feynman shocked and
discouraged. Still, when the year ended, the administration pleaded with
him to keep on for a second year, teaching the same students, now
sophomores. He did, finally trying to teach a thorough subcourse in
quantum mechanics, again reversing the conventional order. Another
Caltech physicist, David Goodstein, said long afterward, “I’ve spoken to
some of those students in recent times, and in the gentle glow of dim
memory, each has told me that having two years of physics from Feynman
himself was the experience of a lifetime.” The reality was different:

As the course wore on, attendance by the kids at the lectures
started dropping alarmingly, but at the same time, more and more
faculty and graduate students started attending, so the room stayed
full, and Feynman may never have known he was losing his intended
audience.

This was the world according to Feynman. No scientist since Newton
had so ambitiously and so unconventionally set down the full measure of

his knowledge of the world—his own knowledge and his community’s. With
intensive editing by other physicists, chiefly Robert B. Leighton and
Matthew Sands, the lectures became the famous “red books”—the threevo lume Feynman Lectures on Physics. Colleges and universities
worldwide tried to adopt them as textbooks and then, inevitably, gave them
up for more manageable and less radical alternatives. Unlike true
textbooks, however, Feynman’s volumes continued to sell steadily a
generation later.

Adorning each volume was a picture of Feynman in shirtsleeves,
gleefully pounding a bongo drum. He came to regret that. “It is odd,” he
said after hearing himself introduced yet again as a bongo player, “but on
the infrequent occasions when I have been called upon in a formal place to
play the bongo drums, the introducer never seems to find it necessary to
mention that I also do theoretical physics. I believe that is probably
because we respect the arts more than the sciences.” And when yet
another request came in for a copy of the photograph—from a Swedish
encyclopedia publisher who wished to “give a human approach to a
presentation of the difficult matter that theoretical physics represents”—he
exploded. “Dear Sir,” he scrawled,

The fact that I beat a drum has nothing to do with the fact that I do
theoretical physics. Theoretical physics is a human endeavor, one of
the higher developments of human beings—and this perpetual desire
to prove that people who do it are human by showing that they do
other things that a few other humans do (like playing bongo drums) is
insulting to me.

I am human enough to tell you to go to hell.

The Explorers and the Tourists

“When you have learned what an explanation really is,” Feynman had said,
“you can then go on to more subtle questions.”

Creeping philosophy. What is an explanation? Science and scientists
had commandeered the practice of explanation, but the theory they left
mainly to philosophers. The why seemed to fall in their domain. “With this

question philosophy began and with this question it will end,” Martin
Heidegger had recently said, “provided that it ends in greatness and not in
an impotent decline.” Feynman, who believed that the impotent decline
was well under way in the academies that supported philosophers,
realized that he had had to develop a view of what constituted explanation,
what legitimized explanation, and which phenomena did and did not
require explanation.

its 

though 

His understanding of explanation did not depart far from the modern
jargon of explanans and
philosophical mainstream, 
explanandum was an alien language to him. Like most philosophers, he
found explanations most satisfactory when they called upon a generalizing,
underlying “law.” A thing is the way it is because other things of its kind are
all that way. Why does Mars travel around the sun in an ellipse? Feynman
explained—and ventured deep into philosophical territory—in an invited
lecture series at Cornell University in 1964. He began by speaking,
nominally, about the law of gravitation. In reality his subject was explanation
itself.

All satellites travel in elliptical orbits. Why? Because objects tend to
travel in a straight line when left alone (the law of inertia) and the
combination of that unchanging motion and a force exerted toward a
center of gravity—by the law of gravitation—creates an ellipse. What
validates the law of gravitation? Feynman expressed the scientist’s
modern view, a blend of the pragmatic and the aesthetic. He cautioned
that even so beautiful a law was provisional: Newton’s law of gravitation
gave way to Einstein’s, and a necessary quantum modification eluded
physicists even now.

That is the same with all our other laws—they are not exact. There
is always an edge of mystery, always a place where we have some
fiddling around to do yet. This may or may not be a property of Nature,
but it certainly is common to all the laws as we know them today.

Yet in its unfinished form the law of gravitation explained so much. To a
practicing scientist, 
it. The same small parcel of
mathematics explained Tycho Brahe’s nightly observations of the planets
in the sixteenth century and Galileo’s measurements of balls rolling down

that validated 

in profundity. The same 

inclined planes, timed against the beat of his own pulse. The planets are
falling, Newton reasoned; the moon feels the same force as an earthly
projectile, the force weakening with the square of the distance. A law is not
a cause—philosophers still wrestled with this distinction—yet it is more
than merely a description. It precedes the thing explained, not in time but in
generality or 
the earth’s
symmetrically bulging tides, rising both toward and away from the moon,
and the newly measured orbits of the moons of Jupiter. It made new
predictions that scientists could confirm or disprove with experiments on
balls hanging delicately in a laboratory or observations of majestically
rotating galaxies a hundred million million times larger. “Exactly the same
law,” Feynman said, and added—having struggled to find the right wording
—

law explained 

Nature uses only the longest threads to weave her pattern, so each
small piece of the fabric reveals the organization of the entire tapestry.

Meanwhile, why does an object in motion tend to travel forever in a straight
line? That, Feynman said, nobody knows. At some deep stage, the
explanations must end.

“Science repudiates philosophy,” Alfred North Whitehead had said. “In
other words, it has never cared to justify its truth or explain its meaning.”
Feynman’s colleagues liked to think of their gruffly plain-spoken pragmatist
hero as the perfect antiphilosopher, doing rather than justifying. His own
rhetoric encouraged them. He lacked patience for the now-popular What is
reality? brand of speculation arising from quantum-mechanical paradoxes.
Yet he could not repudiate philosophy; he had to find ways to justify the
truth that he and his colleagues sought. The modern physics had banished
any possibility of discovering a system of laws unambiguously tying effects
to causes; or a system of laws deduced and conjoined with perfect logical
consistency; or a system of laws rooted in the objects that people can see
and feel. For philosophers, these had all been marks of a sound
explanatory law. Now, however, a particle might or might not decay, an
electron might or might not pass through a slit in a screen. A minimum
principle like the principle of least action might be derived from laws of
forces and motion, or those laws might depend on the principle: who could

say with logical certainty? And the basic stuff of science had grown
inexorably more abstract. As the physicist David Park put it: “None of the
entities that appear in fundamental physical theory today are accessible to
the senses. Even more … there are phenomena that apparently are not in
any way amenable to explanation in terms of things, even invisible things,
that move in the space and time defined by the laboratory.” With all these
traditional virtues removed—or worse, partly removed while still partly
necessary—it fell to science to build a new understanding of the nature of
explanation. Or so Feynman argued: the philosophers themselves, he said,
were always a tempo behind, like tourists moving in after the explorers
have left.

Scientists had their own forms of blindness. It was often said in the
quantum-mechanical era—Feynman had said it himself—that the only true
test of a theory was its ability to produce good numbers, numbers agreeing
with experiment. The American pragmatism of the early twentieth century
had brought forth views like Slater’s at MIT: “Questions about a theory
which do not affect its ability to predict experimental results correctly seem
to me quibbles about words.” Yet Feynman now felt a hollowness in the
purely operational view of what a theory means to a scientist. He
recognized that theories came laden with mental baggage, with what he
called a philosophy, in fact. He had trouble defining this: “an understanding
of the law”; “a way that a person holds the laws in his mind …” The
philosophy could not be discarded as readily as a pragmatic scientist
might suggest.

Consider a Mayan astronomer, he suggested. (In Mexico he had grown
interested in the deciphering of the great ancient codices, hieroglyphic
manuscripts that employed long tables of bars and dots to set down an
intricate knowledge of the movements of sun, moon, and planets. Codes,
mathematics, and astronomy—eventually he delivered a lecture at Caltech
on deciphering Mayan hieroglyphics. Afterward, Murray Gell-Mann
“countered,” Feynman said, with a series of six lectures on the languages
of the world.) The Maya had a theory of astronomy that enabled them to
explain their observations and to make predictions long into the future. It
was a theory in the utilitarian modern spirit: a set of rules, quite
mechanical, which when followed produced accurate results. Yet it seemed
to lack a kind of understanding. “They counted a certain number and

subtracted some numbers, and so on,” he said. “There was no discussion
of what the moon was. There was no discussion even of the idea that it
went around.”

Now a “young man” approaches the astronomer with a new idea. What if
there are balls of rock out there, far away, moving under the influence of
forces just like the forces that pull rocks to the ground? Perhaps it would
make possible a different way of calculating the motions of the heavenly
bodies. (Feynman certainly had memories of a young man confronting his
elders with new, half-formed physical intuitions.)

“Yes,” says the astronomer, “and how accurately can you predict
eclipses?” He says, “I haven’t developed the thing very far yet.” Then
says the astronomer, “Well, we can calculate eclipses more accurately
than you can with your model, so you must not pay any attention to
your idea because obviously the mathematical scheme is better.”

The notion that alternative theories could account plausibly for the same
observations had slipped into a central position in the working philosophy
of scientists. Philosophers called it empirical equivalence, when they
began to catch up. The recent history of quantum mechanics had pivoted
on the empirical equivalence of Heisenberg’s and Schrödinger’s versions.
The empirical equivalence of very different-seeming theories could be
demonstrated mathematically, as Dyson had shown for Feynman’s and
Schwinger’s quantum electrodynamics. Scientists knew, usually without
thinking about it, that empirically equivalent theories could have different
consequences, mathematics and logic notwithstanding.

For Feynman, especially, the tension between alternative theories
served as a creative force, an engine for generating new knowledge.
Perhaps more than any living physicist, he had made a specialty of
learning what models could be derived from which principles, and what
models from each other. To Dyson’s astonishment, he had stood at a
blackboard one day in 1948 and interrupted their heady discussions of
quantum electrodynamics to show him something different. Sketching
quickly, he derived the nineteenth-century Maxwell field equations—the
classical understanding of electricity and magnetism—backward from the
new quantum mechanics. Einstein had started with the Maxwell equations

and then shifted the perspective of the observer to arrive at his theory of
relativity; Feynman went the other way in a fit of ahistorical perversity. He
began with a void, no fields or waves, no concept of relativity, not even a
notion of light itself, just a single particle obeying quantum mechanics’ odd
rules. Before Dyson’s eyes he traveled back mathematically from the new
physics, with its riddles of uncertainty and immeasurability, to the
comforting exactitude of the previous century. He showed that Maxwell’s
field equations were not a foundation but a consequence of the new
quantum mechanics. Startled and impressed, Dyson urged him to publish.
Feynman just laughed and said, “Oh, no, it’s not serious.” As Dyson
understood it later, Feynman had been trying to create a new theory
“outside the framework of conventional physics.”

His motivation was to discover a new theory, not to reinvent the old
one… . His purpose was to explore as widely as possible the universe
of particle dynamics. He wanted to make as few assumptions as he
could.

A theorist who can juggle different theories in his mind has a creative
advantage, Feynman argued, when it comes time to change the theories.
The path-integral formulation of quantum mechanics might be empirically
equivalent to other formulations and yet—given less-than-omniscient
human physicists—find more natural-seeming application to realms of
science not yet explored. Different theories tended to give a physicist
“different ideas for guessing,” Feynman said. And the century’s history had
shown that when even so elegant and pure a theory as Newton’s had to be
replaced, slight modifications could not suffice.

To get something that would produce a slightly different result it
had to be completely different. In stating a new law you cannot make
imperfections on a perfect thing; you have to have another perfect
thing.

He understood explanations as a surgeon understands knives. He had a
set of practical tests, heuristics, that he applied when reaching a judgment
about a new idea in physics: for example, did it explain something
unrelated to the original problem. He would challenge a young theorist:

What can you explain that you didn’t set out to explain? He knew that
why? is a question without an end and that our knowledge of things is
inextricable from the language we use. The words and analogies from
which we build our explanations are culpably linked with the things
explained. Explanans and explanandum are inextricable after all. An
interviewer for the British Broadcasting Corporation, Christopher Sykes,
once asked him to explain magnets: “If you get hold of two magnets and
you push them you can feel this pushing between them… . Now what is it,
the feeling between those two magnets?”

“What do you mean, what’s the feeling?” Feynman growled. His hair,
swept back in dramatic gray waves, had receded high atop his head,
leaving a statue’s high brow above a pair of heavy eyebrows that curled
more impishly than ever. His pale blue shirt was open at the collar. A pen
and eyeglass case rested in his front pocket, as always. Off camera, a
defensive note entered the interviewer’s voice.

“Well, there’s something there, isn’t there? The sensation is that there’s

something there when you push these two magnets together.”

“Listen to my question,” Feynman said. “What is the meaning when you
say there’s a feeling? Of course you feel it. Now what is it you want to
know?”

“What I want to know is what’s going on between these two bits of

metal.”

“The magnets repel each other.”
“But what does that mean? Or why are they doing that? Or how are they
doing that?” Feynman shifted in his easy chair, and the interviewer added,
“I must say I think that’s a perfectly reasonable question to ask.”

“Of course it’s a reasonable—it’s an excellent question, okay?”
Reluctantly, Feynman now stepped into metaphysics. Particle theorists
were toying with a “bootstrap” model, in which no particle lies at a deepest
level, but all are interdependent composites. The name bootstrap paid
homage to the paradoxical circularity of having to build each fundamental
particle from all the others. Feynman, as he now made clear, believed in a
kind of bootstrap model of explanation itself.

You see, when you ask why something happens, how does a

person answer why something happens?

For example, Aunt Minnie is in the hospital. Why? Because she
went out on the ice and slipped and broke her hip. That satisfies
people. But it wouldn’t satisfy someone who came from another planet
and knew nothing about things… . When you explain a why, you have
to be in some framework that you’ve allowed something to be true.
Otherwise you’re perpetually asking why… . You go deeper and
deeper in various directions.

Why did she slip on the ice? Well, ice is slippery. Everybody knows
that—no problem. But you ask why is ice slippery… . And then you’re
involved with something, because there aren’t many things as slippery
as ice… . A solid that’s so slippery?

Because it is in the case of ice that when you stand on it, they say,
momentarily the pressure melts the ice a little bit so that you’ve got an
instantaneous water surface on which you’re slipping. Why on ice and
not on other things? Because water expands when it freezes. So the
pressure tries to undo the expansion and melts it… .

I’m not answering your question, but I’m telling you how difficult a
why question is. You have to know what it is that you’re permitted to
understand … and what it is you’re not.

You’ll notice in this example that the more I ask why, it gets
interesting after a while. That’s my idea, that the deeper a thing is, the
more interesting… .

Now when you ask why two magnets repel, there are many different
levels. It depends whether you’re a student of physics or an ordinary
person who doesn’t know anything.

If you don’t know anything at all, about all I can say is that there’s a
magnetic force that makes them repel. And that you’re feeling that
force. Well, you say that’s very strange because I don’t feel a force like
that in other circumstances… . You’re not at all disturbed by the fact
that when you put your hand on the chair it pushes you back. But we
found out by looking at it that that’s the same force… . It turns out that
the magnetic and electric force with which I wish to explain these
things is the deeper thing that we would start with to explain many
other things… .

If I said that magnets attract as if they were connected with rubber
bands, I would be cheating you, because they’re not connected with

rubber bands… . If you were curious enough you’d ask me why rubber
bands tend to pull back together again, and I would end up explaining
that in terms of electrical forces—which are the very things I was using
the rubber bands to explain, so I have cheated very badly, you see.

So I am not going to be able to give you an answer to why magnets
attract. Except to tell you that they do … I really can’t do a good job—
any job—of explaining the electromagnetic force in terms of
something you’re more familiar with, because I don’t understand it in
terms of anything else that you’re more familiar with.

He sat back and grinned.

To the professionals Feynman’s musings were not philosophy but a
charmingly naive folk wisdom. He was both after and ahead of his time.
Academic epistemology was still wrestling with unknowability. What choice
did they have, in light of scientific relativity and uncertainty, the
abandonment of strict causality and the pervasiveness of ever-qualified
probabilities? No more certainties, no more absolutes. The Harvard
philosopher W. V. Quine mused, “I think that for scientific or philosophical
purposes the best we can do is give up the notion of knowledge as a bad
job… .” Not knowing had its ironies as well as its pleasures. For
philosophers this was “the post-scholastic era,” as a later physicist, John
Ziman, put it, “when it seemed essential to (dis)prove the peculiar
(un)reality of scientific knowledge (theories/facts/data/hypotheses) by
analysing (deconstructing) the arguments on which it was (supposedly)
based.” Scientists themselves, in the knowledge business, had no use for
this mode of discourse. Judged by results, their understanding of nature
seemed richer and more efficacious than ever, the quantum paradoxes
notwithstanding. They had rescued knowledge from uncertainty after all.
“The scientist has a lot of experience with ignorance and doubt and
uncertainty,” Feynman said. “… we take it for granted that it is perfectly
consistent to be unsure—that it is possible to live and not know. But I don’t
know whether everyone realizes that this is true.”

Feynman’s gift to his coworkers was a credo, accreted over time and
disbursed both formally and informally, in lectures and books like the 1965
Character of Physical Law and in a stance, an attitude, that seemed too
natural to constitute a philosophy.

He believed in the primacy of doubt, not as a blemish upon our ability to
know but as the essence of knowing. The alternative to uncertainty is
authority, against which science had fought for centuries. “Great value of a
satisfactory philosophy of ignorance,” he jotted on a sheet of notepaper
one day. “… teach how doubt is not to be feared but welcomed.”

He believed that science and religion are natural adversaries. Einstein
said, “Science without religion is lame; religion without science is blind.”
Feynman found this style of accommodation to be intolerable. He
repudiated 
the conventional God: “the kind of a personal God,
characteristic of Western religions, to whom you pray and who has
something to do with creating the universe and guiding you in morals.”
Some theologians had retreated from the conception of God as a kind of
superperson—Father and King—willful, white-haired, and male. Any God
who might take an interest in human affairs was too anthropomorphic for
Feynman—implausible in the less and less human-centered universe
discovered by science. Many scientists agreed, but his views were so
rarely expressed that in 1959 a local television station, KNXT, felt obliged
to suppress an interview in which he declared:

It doesn’t seem to me that this fantastically marvelous universe,
this tremendous range of time and space and different kinds of
animals, and all the different planets, and all these atoms with all their
motions, and so on, all this complicated thing can merely be a stage
so that God can watch human beings struggle for good and evil—
which is the view that religion has. The stage is too big for the drama.

Religion meant superstition: reincarnation, miracles, virgin birth. It replaced
ignorance and doubt with certainty and faith; Feynman was happy to
embrace ignorance and doubt.

No scientist liked the God of Sunday school stories or the “God of the
gaps”—the last-resort explanation for the unexplainable, called on through
the ages to fill holes in current knowledge. Those who did turn to faith as a
supplement to science preferred grander and less literal gods: “the ground
of all that is,” as John Polkinghorne, a high-energy physicist turned
Anglican priest, said: “Those who are seeking understanding through and
through—a natural instinct for the scientist—are seeking God, whether they

name him or not.” Their God did not fill gaps in the sense of particular
lacunae for evolutionary theory or astrophysics—how did the universe
begin?—but hovered over whole domains of knowledge: ethics,
aesthetics, metaphysics. Feynman conceded the existence of genuine
knowledge outside the range of science. He admitted that there were
questions science could not answer, but grudgingly: he saw a danger in
tying moral guidance to unpalatable myths, as religion did, and he
resented the common view that science, with its merciless unraveling and
explaining, was an enemy of the emotional appreciation of beauty. “Poets
say science takes away from the beauty of the stars—mere globs of gas
atoms,” he wrote in a famous footnote.

I too can see the stars on a desert night, and feel them. But do I
see less or more? The vastness of the heavens stretches my
imagination—stuck on this carousel my little eye can catch onemillion-year-old light. A vast pattern—of which I am a part… . What is
the pattern, or the meaning, or the why? It does not do harm to the
mystery to know a little about it. For far more marvelous is the truth
than any artists of the past imagined it. Why do the poets of the
present not speak of it? What men are poets who can speak of
Jupiter if he were a man, but if he is an immense spinning sphere of
methane and ammonia must be silent?

He believed, too, in an independence of moral belief from any particular
theory of the machinery of the universe. An ethical system that depended
on faith in a watchful or vengeful God was unnecessarily fragile, prone to
collapse when doubt began to undermine faith.

He believed that it was not certainty but freedom from certainty that
empowered people to make judgments about right and wrong: knowing
that they could never be more than provisionally right, but able to act
nonetheless. Only by understanding uncertainty could people learn how to
evaluate the many kinds of false knowledge that bombard them: claims of
mind reading and spoon bending, belief in flying saucers bearing alien
visitors. Science can never disprove such claims, any more than it can
disprove God. It can only devise experiments and explore alternative
explanations until it gains a commonsense sureness. “I have argued flying

saucers with lots of people,” Feynman once said. “I was interested in this:
they keep arguing that it is possible. And that’s true. It is possible. They do
not appreciate that the problem is not to demonstrate whether it’s possible
or not but whether it’s going on or not.”

How could one evaluate miracle cures or astrological forecasts or
telekinetic victories at the roulette wheel? By subjecting them to the
scientific method. Look for people who recovered from leukemia without
having prayed. Place sheets of glass between the psychic and the roulette
table. “If it’s not a miracle,” he said, “the scientific method will destroy it.” It
was essential to understand coincidence and probability. It was noteworthy
that flying-saucer lore involved a considerably greater variety of saucer
than of creature: “orange balls of light, blue spheres which bounce on the
floor, gray fogs which disappear, gossamer-like streams which evaporate
into the air, thin, round flat things out of which objects come with funny
shapes that are something like a human being.” It was fantastically
improbable, he noted, that alien visitors should come in near-human form
and just at the moment in history when people discovered the possibility of
space travel.

He subjected other forms of science and near-science to the same
scrutiny: tests by psychologists, statistical sampling of public opinion. He
had developed pointed ways of illustrating the slippage that occurred when
experimenters allowed themselves to be less than rigorously skeptical or
failed to appreciate the power of coincidence. He described a common
experience: an experimenter notices a peculiar result after many trials—
rats in a maze, for example, turn alternately right, left, right, and left. The
experimenter calculates the odds against something so extraordinary and
decides it cannot have been an accident. Feynman would say: “I had the
most remarkable experience… . While coming in here I saw license plate
ANZ 912. Calculate for me, please, the odds that of all the license plates
…” And he would tell a story from his days in the fraternity at MIT, with a
surprise ending.

I was upstairs typewriting a theme on something about philosophy.
And I was completely engrossed, not thinking of anything but the
theme, when all of a sudden in a most mysterious fashion there swept
through my mind the idea: my grandmother has died. Now of course I

exaggerate slightly, as you should in all such stories. I just sort of half
got the idea for a minute… . Immediately after that the telephone rang
downstairs. I remember this distinctly for the reason you will now
hear… . It was for somebody else. My grandmother was perfectly
healthy and there’s nothing to it. Now what we have to do is to
accumulate a large number of these to fight the few cases when it
could happen.

Feynman, who had once astonished 

the Princeton admissions
committee with his low scores in every subject but physics and
mathematics, did believe in the primacy of science among all the spheres
of knowledge. He would not concede that poetry or painting or religion
could reach a different kind of truth. The very idea of different, equally valid
versions of truth struck him as a modern form of cant, another
misunderstanding of uncertainty.

in 

time? Are 

travel backward 

That any particular knowledge—quantum mechanics, for example—must
be provisional and imperfect does not mean that competing theories
cannot be judged better or worse. He was not what philosophers called a
realist—by one definition, someone who, in asserting the existence of, say,
electrons, adds “a desk-thumping, foot-stamping shout of ‘Really!’” Real
though electrons seemed, Feynman and some other physicists recognized
that they are part of a never-perfect, always-changing scaffolding. Do
electrons really 
those nanosecond
resonances really particles? Do particles really spin? Do they really have
strangeness and charm? Many scientists believed in a straightforward
reality. Others, including Feynman, felt that in the late twentieth century it
was not necessary or possible to answer a final yes. It was preferable to
hold one’s models delicately in the mind, weighing alternative viewpoints
and letting assumptions slide here and there. But to physicists the
scaffolding was not all. It did imply a truth within, toward which humans
might perpetually strive, however imperfectly. Feynman did not believe, as
many philosophers did, that the now-famous “conceptual revolutions” or
“paradigm shifts” to which science seemed so prone—Einstein’s relativity
replacing Newton’s dynamics—amounted to the replacing of one socially
bound fashion by another, like hemlines rising and falling year to year. Like
most members of his community, he could not abide in his business what

one philosopher, Arthur Fine, called “the great lesson of twentieth-century
analytic and continental philosophy, namely, that there are no general
methodological or philosophical resources for deciding such things.”
Scientists do have methods. Their theories are provisional but not
arbitrary, not mere social constructions. By means of the peculiar
stratagem of refusing to acknowledge that any truth may be as valid as any
other, they succeed in preventing any truth from becoming as valid as any
other. Their approach to knowledge differs from all others—religion, art,
literary criticism—in that the goal is never a potpourri of equally attractive
realities. Their goal, though it always recedes before them however they
approach it, is consensus.

The Swedish Prize

When Einstein won the 1921 Nobel Prize, it did not create a stir. Although
Einstein could command front-page coverage in the New York Times
merely by delivering a public lecture, the detail of the prize impressed the
editors only to the extent of a one-sentence notice inside the newspaper,
lumping him with the next year’s winner, a more obscure professor whose
name they misspelled:

The Nobel Committee has awarded the physics prize for 1921 to
Professor Dr. Albert Einstein of Germany, identified with the theory of
relativity, and that for 1922 to Professor Neils Bohr, Copenhagen.

Gradually the awards gained in stature. Longevity contributed: there were
other prizes, but the foresighted Alfred Nobel, inventor of dynamite, had
established his early. The particular contributions of scientists grew more
difficult to describe to a lay public, and the awarding of such a
international honor provided a useful benchmark. A
distinguished 
physicist’s obituary in the late twentieth century would almost have to begin
with the phrase “won the Nobel Prize for …” or the phrase “worked on the
atomic bomb,” or both. The prize committee arrived at its judgments with
care: it made errors, sometimes serious ones, but it generally reflected a
conservative consensus of leading scientists in many countries. Scientists

began to covet the prize with an intensity that they suppressed as well as
they could. Their interest could be felt nonetheless in the ways scientists
did and did not discuss the prize. Any potential prizewinner exhibited an
extreme reluctance to mention its name. The distinguished group of those
who had almost won revealed a forlorn tendency to rehearse for the rest of
their lives the slight contingencies that had stood between them and the
prize—the indecision that made them delay a paper for a crucial few
months, or the timidity that kept them from joining a team embarked on an
all-too-promising experiment. Even winners showed how much they cared
through small mannerisms, such as the euphemism winkingly employed by
Gell-Mann, among others: “the Swedish prize.” The winners formed an elite
group—but elite was too weak a word. A sociologist assessing the prize’s
stature found herself having to multiply superlatives: “As the ne plus ultra of
honors in science, the Nobel Prize elevates its recipients not merely to the
scientific elite but to the uppermost rank of the scientific ultra-elite, the thin
layer of those at the top of the stratification hierarchy of elites who exhibit
especially great influence, authority, or power and who generally have the
highest prestige within what is a prestigious collectivity to begin with.”
Physicists always knew who among their colleagues had won and who had
not.

Few scientists after Einstein, if any, remained larger than the prize—
capable of adding as much to its stature as it added to theirs. In 1965
several active physicists at least seemed to be sure future winners, as
much because of their dominance in the community as because of their
particular accomplishments. Feynman, Schwinger, Gell-Mann, and Bethe
were chief among them. The Nobel committee traditionally found it easier
to identify worthy candidates than to pinpoint their most worthy particular
achievements. Most notoriously, Einstein had won specifically for his work
on the photoelectric effect, not for relativity. When Bethe finally did win, in
1967, the prize singled out his parsing of the thermonuclear reactions in
stars—important work, but an arbitrary choice from an unusually broad and
influential career spanning decades. Feynman could plausibly have won for
his liquid-helium work, had that been his only achievement. Each fall, as
the announcement neared, Feynman had been alive to the possibility. He
and Gell-Mann might have won for their theory of weak interactions, yet
Gell-Mann had already moved on to a more sweeping model of high-

energy particle physics. The committee found it easier to reward particular
experiments or discoveries, and experimenters tended to win their prizes
far more promptly than theorists. Broad theoretical conceptions like
relativity were the most difficult of all. Even so, it was odd that the Nobel
committee had not yet recognized the theoretical watershed reached
almost 
twenty years before with quantum electrodynamics and
renormalization. The experimenters Willis Lamb and Polykarp Kusch had
long since been recognized, in 1955, for their contributions to quantum
electrodynamics.

No more than three people may share a Nobel Prize. That rule may have
added to the complications in the case of quantum electrodynamics.
Feynman and Schwinger were two. Tomonaga had matched or anticipated
the essence of Schwinger’s theory, even if his version had not been quite
as panoramic. Dyson was a problem. His contribution had been the most
mathematical, and 
the Nobel Prize abhorred mathematics. Some
physicists felt vehemently that Dyson had done no more than analyze and
publicize work created by others. Dyson, having settled at the Institute for
Advanced Study, drifted away from the theoretical physics community. He
had no taste for the involutions of particle physics. He indulged his lifelong
passion for space travel by participating in various visionary projects. He
grew fascinated with the global politics of nuclear weapons and with the
origin of life. The Nobel recommendations of influential American
physicists—his old antagonist Oppenheimer among them—may have
omitted Dyson, although to a knowledgeable minority it seemed that no
one, during the tumultuous birth of modern quantum electrodynamics, had
understood the problem more broadly or influenced the community more
deeply.

it named Feynman, Schwinger, and Tomonaga 

Thus, when the Western Union “telefax” arrived at 9 A.M. on October 21,
1965, 
their
“fundamental work in quantum electrodynamics with deep ploughing
consequences for the physics of elementary particles.” By then Feynman
had been awake for more than five hours. The first call had come at 4 A.M.
from a correspondent of the American Broadcasting Corporation shortly
after the announcement in Stockholm. He rolled over and told Gweneth. At
first she thought he was joking. The telephone kept ringing until finally they
left it off the hook. They could not get back to sleep. Feynman knew his life

for 

would not be the same. Photographers from the Associated Press and the
local newspaper were at his house before sunrise. He posed outdoors in
the dark with Carl, his sleepy three-year-old, and gamely held a telephone
receiver to his ear as the flashbulbs popped.

Since the press now had to give an account of quantum electrodynamics
for the first time, Feynman rapidly learned to field a sequence of variations
on what seemed to him a single question: “Will you please tell us what you
won the prize for—but don’t tell us! Because we’ll not understand it.” The
actual questions were impossible to answer: “What applications does this
paper have in the computer industry?” “I’m going to ask you also to
comment on the statement that your work was to convert experimental data
on strange particles into hard mathematical fact.” And then the one
question he could answer: “What time did you hear about the award?” In a
private moment a reporter for Time made a suggestion he loved: that he
simply say, “Listen, buddy, if I could tell you in a minute what I did, it
wouldn’t be worth the Nobel Prize.” He realized that he could work up a
stock phrase about the interaction of matter and radiation but felt it would
be a fraud. He did make a serious remark—and repeated it all day—that
reflected his inner feeling about renormalization. The problem had been to
eliminate infinities in calculations, he said, and “We have designed a
method for sweeping them under the rug.”

Julian Schwinger called, and they shared a happy moment. Schwinger,
still at Harvard, was pursuing an ever more solitary road in his theoretical
physics but, unlike Feynman, had brought forth a long and distinguished
string of graduate students working on the frontier problems of high-energy
physics. A decade earlier, when Feynman won the Einstein Award, he
wrote his mother: “I thought you would be happy that I beat Schwinger out
at last, but it turns out he got the thing 3 yrs ago. Of course, he only got ½ a
medal, so I guess you’ll be happy. You always compare me with
Schwinger.” Now their rivalry was over, if not forgotten. Feynman called
Tomonaga in Japan and then reported to a student journalist a capsule
caricature of the Nobel Prize–day telephone conversation:

[FEYNMAN:] Congratulations.
[TOMONAGA:] Same to you.
How does it feel to be a Nobel Prize winner?

I guess you know.
Can you explain to me in layman’s terms exactly what it was you

did to win the prize?
I am very sleepy.

By afternoon students had raised across the dome of Throop Hall an
enormous cloth banner reading, “Win big, RF.”

Hundreds of letters and telegrams came in over the next weeks. He
heard from childhood friends who had not seen him in almost forty years.
There were cables from shipboard and muffled telephone calls from
Mexico. He told reporters that he planned to spend his third of the $55,000
prize money to pay his taxes on his other income (actually he used it to buy
a beach house in Mexico). He felt himself under stress. He had always felt
that honors were suspect. He liked to ridicule pomp and talk about his
father, the uniform salesman who taught him to see past the uniforms. Now
he would be traveling to Sweden to appear before the king. The mere
thought of buying a tuxedo made him nervous. He did not want to bow
before a foreign potentate. For several weeks he grew obsessed with an
odd fantasy that one was forbidden to turn one’s back on the king and
therefore had to back up a flight of steps after receiving the award. He
practiced jumping backward up steps, both feet at once, because he
decided that he would invent a method that no one had used before. He
planned to examine the actual steps in advance and rehearse. One friend
sent him a rear-view mirror from an automobile as a joke; Feynman took it
as evidence that other people knew about this rule. When Sweden’s
ambassador paid him a courtesy call, Feynman took the opportunity to
confess his worry. The ambassador assured him that he could face any
direction he chose; no one climbed stairs backward.

In the event, he put on white tie and tails, slicked his hair down, and
grinned as he accepted the award from a bespectacled King Gustav VI
Adolf. The prizewinners sped through a week of banquets, dances, formal
toasts, and impromptu speeches in Sweden’s ornate and palatial civic
buildings. They traveled from Stockholm to Uppsala and back, partied with
students in a beer cellar, and made conversation with ambassadors and
princesses. They collected their medals, certificates, and bank checks.
They delivered their Nobel Prize lectures. Feynman realized that he had

never read anyone’s Nobel lecture. Scientists’, especially, seemed
automatically obscure. Friends told him about William Faulkner’s famous
speech in 1950 (“I believe that man will not merely endure: he will prevail”);
he did not think he could produce anything so grand, but he wanted to say
something memorable, and he did not want to give the précis of quantum
electrodynamics that might also be coming from his fellow winners.

He believed that historians, journalists, and scientists themselves all
participated in a tradition of writing about science that obscured the
working reality, the sense of science as a process rather than a body of
formal results. Real science was confusion and doubt, ambition and
desire, a march through fog. With hindsight, the polished histories tended
to impose a post facto logic on the sequence of reasoning and discovery.
The appearance of an idea in the scientific literature and the actual
communication of the same idea through the community could be sharply
different, Feynman knew. He decided to give a personal, anecdotal, and—
he claimed—unpolished version of his route to the space-time view of
quantum electrodynamics. “We have a habit in writing articles published in
scientific journals to make the work as finished as possible,” he began, “to
cover up all the tracks, to not worry about the blind alleys or to describe
how you had the wrong idea first.”

He described the historic difficulty of infinities in the self-interaction of
the electron. He confessed his secret desire as a graduate student to
eliminate the field altogether—to produce a theory of direct action between
charges. He recounted his collaboration with Wheeler: “as I was stupid, so
was Professor Wheeler that much more clever.” He tried to give his
listeners a feeling for what had seemed a new philosophical stance—the
willingness of a physicist in the post-Einstein era to accept paradoxes
without stopping to say, “Oh, no, how could that be?”—and offered his
memory of the way his physical viewpoint had evolved. He repeated his
view of renormalization: “I think that the renormalization theory is simply a
way to sweep the difficulties of the divergences of electrodynamics under
the rug. I am, of course, not sure of that.”

He pointed out a remarkable irony of the story. So many of the ideas he
nursed on his way to his Nobel Prize–winning work had themselves proved
faulty: his first notion that a charge should not act on itself; the whole
Wheeler-Feynman half-advanced, half-retarded electrodynamics. Even his

path integrals and his view of electrons moving backward in time were only
aids to guessing, not essential parts of the theory, he said.

The method used here, of reasoning in physical terms, therefore,
appears to be extremely inefficient. On looking back over the work, 1
can only feel a kind of regret for the enormous amount of physical
reasoning and mathematical re-expression… .

But he also believed that the inefficiency, the guessing of equations, the
juggling of alternative physical viewpoints were, even now, the key to
discovering new laws. He concluded with advice to students:

The chance is high that the truth lies in the fashionable direction.
But, on the off-chance that it: is in another direction—a direction
obvious from an unfashionable view of field theory—who will find it?
Only someone who has sacrificed himself by teaching himself
quantum electrodynamics from a peculiar and unfashionable point of
view; one that he may have to invent for himself.

He left Stockholm for Geneva, where he repeated the talk before a jubilant,
reverent audience at Europe’s great new accelerator center, CERN, the
European Center for Nuclear Research. He said, standing before them in
his new dress suit, that the new laureates had been talking about whether
they would ever be able to return to normal. Jacques Monod, who shared
the prize for medicine, had declared it was a biological fact that an
organism is changed by experience. “I discovered a great difficulty,”
Feynman said, grinning malevolently. “I always took off my coat in giving a
lecture, and I just don’t feel like taking it off.” As he continued, “I’ve
changed! I’ve changed!” the audience erupted in laughter and catcalls. He
took off the coat.

Once more, he said he would speak as an old man to the young
scientists and urge them to break away from the pack. At CERN, as at all
the laboratories of high-energy physics, the pack was growing rapidly.
Every experiment required enormous teams. Author lists for articles in the
Physical Review were beginning to take up a comically large portion of the
page.

“It will not do you any harm whatever to think in an original fashion,”

Feynman said. He offered a probabilistic argument.

The odds that your theory will be in fact right, and that the general thing
that everybody’s working on will be wrong, is low. But the odds that you,
Little Boy Schmidt, will be the guy who figures a thing out, is not smaller… .
It’s very important that we do not all follow the same fashion. Because
although it is ninety percent sure that the answer lies over there, where
Gell-Mann is working, what happens if it doesn’t?

“If you give more money to theoretical physics,” he added, “it doesn’t do
any good if it just increases the number of guys following the comet head.
So it’s necessary to increase the amount of variety … and the only way to
do it is to implore you few guys to take a risk with your lives that you will
never be heard of again, and go off in the wild blue yonder and see if you
can figure it out.”

Most scientists knew the not-so-amusing metalaw that the receipt of the
Nobel Prize marks the end of one’s productive career. For many
recipients, of course, the end came long before. For others the fame and
distinction tend to accelerate the waning of a scientist’s ability to give his
creative work the time-intensive, fanatical concentration it often requires.
Some prizewinners fight back. Francis Crick designed a blunt form letter:

Dr. Crick thanks you for your letter but regrets that he is unable to

accept your kind invitation to:

help you in your project

send an autograph
provide a photograph read your manuscript
cure your disease
be interviewed
talk on the radio
appear on TV
speak after dinner
give a testimonial

deliver a lecture
attend a conference
act as chairman
become an editor
write a book
accept an honorary degree

Requests in most of these categories now filled Feynman’s mail (except
that his correspondents tended more toward hear my theory of the
universe than cure my disease). Mature scientists did become laboratory

heads, department chairmen, foundation officials, institute directors. Victor
Weisskopf, one of those whom the prize had just barely eluded, was now
director of CERN, and he thought Feynman, too, would be driven willy-nilly
into administration. He goaded Feynman into accepting a wager, signed
before witnesses: “Mr. FEYNMAN will pay the sum of TEN DOLLARS to Mr.
WEISSKOPF if at any time during the next TEN YEARS (i.e. before the THIRTY
FIRST DAY of DECEMBER of the YEAR ONE THOUSAND NINE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY
FIVE), the said Mr. FEYNMAN has held a ‘responsible position.’” They had no
disagreement about what that would mean:

For 

the purpose of 

the aforementioned WAGER, 

term
“responsible position” shall be taken to signify a position which, by
reason of its nature, compels the holder to issue instructions to other
persons to carry out certain acts, notwithstanding the fact that the
holder has no understanding whatsoever of that which he is instructing
the aforesaid persons to accomplish.

the 

Feynman collected the ten dollars in 1976.

He already tried to avoid encumbrances as though every invitation,
honor, professional membership, or knock at his door were another vine
wrapping itself around his creative center. By the time he won the Nobel
Prize he had been trying for five years to resign from the National
Academy of Sciences. This simple task was taking on a life of its own. He
began by scribbling a note with his dues bill: he paid the forty dollars, but
he resigned. Almost a year later he received a personal letter from the
academy’s president, the biologist Detlev W. Bronk (whose original paper
on the single nerve impulse he had read as a Princeton student). He felt
obliged to write a polite explanation:

My desire to resign is merely a personal one; it is not meant as a
protest of any kind… . My peculiarity is this: I find it psychologically
very distasteful to judge people’s “merit.” So I cannot participate in the
main activity of selecting people for membership. To be a member of
a group, of which an important activity is to choose others deemed
worthy of membership in that self-esteemed group, bothers me… .

Maybe I don’t explain it very well, but suffice to say that I am not

happy as a member of a self-perpetuating honorary society.

It was 1961. Bronk let Feynman’s letter sit for months. Then he answered
with calculated obtuseness:

Thank you for your willingness to continue as a member of the
academy… . I have done my best to reduce the emphasis on the
“honor” of election… . I am grateful that you will continue a member at
least during my last year as president.

Eight years later, Feynman was still trying. He re-resigned. A reply came
from the president-elect, Philip Handler, who mused talmudically, “I
suppose that we truly have no alternative, in the sense that surely the
Academy must adhere to your wishes,” and deftly slid Feynman’s
resignation into the subjunctive mood:

I would consider your resignation a most sorrowful event indeed…
. I write to hope that you will reconsider… . I am reluctant to endorse
such an action… . Before processing your request, a procedure for
which I trust that the Office of the Home Secretary is in some manner
prepared, I very much hope that you will let us hear from you further… .

Feynman wrote again, as plainly as he could. Handler replied:

I have your somewhat cryptic note… . We are seeking to increase
the meaningful roles of the Academy… . Wouldn’t you rather join us in
that effort?

Finally, by 1970, Feynman’s resignation began to seem real even to the
academy, though he continued to hear from scientists who wondered
whether he would confirm the rumor and explain why.

He turned down honorary degrees offered by the University of Chicago
and by Columbia University and thus finally kept the promise he had made
to himself on the day he received his doctorate from Princeton. He turned
down hundreds of other propositions with a curtness that impressed even
his protective secretary. To a book publisher who had invited him to
“introduce a draft of fresh air into a rather stuffy area,” he wrote: “No sir.
The area is stuffy from too much hot air already.” He refused to sign

petitions and newspaper advertisements; the Vietnam War was now
drawing the opposition of many scientists, but he would not join them
publicly. Feynman, Nobel laureate, found that even canceling a magazine
subscription took an entire correspondence. “Dear Professor Feynman,”
began a long letter from the editor of Physics Today, the magazine whose
second issue had carried his article about the Pocono conference in 1948:

The comment you sent back with our questionnaire on our May
issue (“I never read your magazine. I don’t know why it is published.
Please take me off your mailing list. I don’t want it.”) poses some
interesting questions for us… .

Four hundred words later, the editor had not given up:

I apologize for asking any more of your time, but all of us at
Physics Today will appreciate it very much if we can have
amplification of your earlier comments.

So Feynman amplified:

Dear Sir,
I’m not “physicists,” I’m just me. I don’t read your magazine so I don’t
know what’s in it. Maybe it’s good, I don’t know. Just don’t send it to
me. Please remove my name from the mailing list as requested. What
other physicists need or don’t need, want or don’t want, has nothing to
do with it… . It was not my intention to shake your confidence in your
magazine—nor to suggest that you stop publication—only that you
stop sending it here. Can you do that please?

He was hardening his shell. He knew he could seem cold. His secretary,
Helen Tuck, protected him, sometimes sending away visitors while
Feynman hid behind her door. Or he would just shout at a hopeful student
to go away—he was working. He almost never participated in the business
of his department at Caltech: tenure decisions, grant proposals, or any of
the other administrative chores that constitute overhead on most scientists’
time. Caltech’s divisions, like the science departments at every American
university, were largely financed through a highly structured process of

applications to the Department of Energy, the Department of Defense, and
other government agencies. There were group applications and individual
applications, supporting salaries, students, equipment, and overhead. At
Caltech a senior professor who could arrange to have the air force, for
example, pay a portion of his salary was rewarded with a discretionary kitty
with which he could travel, buy a computer, or support a graduate student.
Alone at Caltech, and virtually alone in physics, Feynman was humored in
his refusal to participate in this process. To some colleagues he seemed
selfish. It occurred to the historian of science Gerald Holton, however, that
Feynman had put on a kind of hair shirt. “It must have been very difficult to
live that way,” Holton said. “It does not come easy to make that conscious
decision to remain unadulterated. Culture by definition is very seductive.
He was a Robinson Crusoe in the big city, and that isn’t easy to do.” I. I.
Rabi once said that physicists are the Peter Pans of the human race.
Feynman clutched at irresponsibility and childishness. He kept a quotation
from Einstein in his files about the “holy curiosity of inquiry”: “this delicate
little plant, aside from stimulation, stands mainly in need of freedom;
without this it goes to wrack and ruin without fail.” He protected his freedom
as though it were a dying candle in a hard wind. He was willing to risk
hurting his friends. Hans Bethe turned sixty the year after Feynman won his
Nobel Prize, and Feynman refused to send a contribution to the customary
volume of articles in his honor.

He was frightened. In the years after the prize he felt uncreative. His
Caltech colleague David Goodstein traveled with him to the University of
Chicago when he went to address the undergraduates there early in 1967.
Goodstein thought he seemed depressed and worried. When Goodstein
came down to breakfast at the faculty club, he found Feynman already
there, talking with someone who Goodstein gradually realized was the
codiscoverer of DNA, James Watson. Watson gave Feynman a
manuscript tentatively titled Honest Jim. It was a tame memoir by later
standards, but when it was published—under a different title, The Double
Helix—it caused an enormous popular stir. With a candor that shocked
many of Watson’s colleagues, 
the
competitiveness, the blunders, the miscommunications, and the raw
excitement of real scientists. Feynman read it in his room at the Chicago
faculty club, skipping the cocktail party in his honor, and found himself

the ambition, 

it portrayed 

moved. Later he wrote Watson:

Don’t let anybody criticize that book who hasn’t read it through to
the end. Its apparent minor faults and petty gossipy incidents fall into
place as deeply meaningful… . The people who say “that is not how
science is done” are wrong… . When you describe what went on in
your head as the truth haltingly staggers upon you and passes on,
finally fully recognized, you are describing how science is done. I
know, for I have had the same beautiful and frightening experience.

Late that night in Chicago he startled Goodstein by pressing the book into
his hands and telling him he had to read it. Goodstein said he would look
forward to it. No, Feynman said. You have to read it now. So Goodstein
did, turning pages until dawn as Feynman paced nearby or sat and
doodled on a sheet of paper. At one point Goodstein remarked, “You
know, it’s amazing that Watson made this great discovery even though he
was so out of touch with what everyone in his field was doing.”

Feynman held up the paper he had been writing on. Amid scribbling and

embellishments he had inscribed one word: DISREGARD.

“That’s what I’ve forgotten,” he said.

Quarks and Partons

In 1983, looking back on the evolution of particle physics since the nowhistoric Shelter 
said,
uncontroversially, that he and his colleagues had developed a theory that
“works.” He summed it up in one intricately crafted sentence (rather more
refined than “All things are made of atoms …”):

conference, Murray Gell-Mann 

Island 

It is of course a Yang-Mills theory, based on color SU(3) and
electroweak SU(2) U(1), with three families of spin ½ leptons and
quarks, their antiparticles, and some spinless Higgs bosons in
doublets and antidoublets of the weak isotopic spin to break the
electroweak group down to U1 of electromagnetism.

His listeners recognized vintage Gell-Mann, from the “of course” onward.
For aficionados there was a poetry in the jargon, much of which Gell-Mann
had invented personally. He loved language more than ever. As always,
during the next hour he punctuated his physics with a stream of abstruse
and punning nomenclatural asides: “By the way, some people have called
the higglet by another name [holds up a box of Axion laundry presoak], in
which case it’s extremely easy to discover in any supermarket”; “… many
physicists—Dimopoulos, Nanopoulos, and Iliopoulos, and for the benefit of
my French friends I add Rastopopoulos”; “… O’Raifertaigh. (His name, by
the way, is written in a simplified manner; the ‘f’ should really be ‘thbh’)”;
and so on.

them 

Some people found his style irritating—among them, those whose
names he tried to correct—but that was a minor detail. Gell-Mann, more
than any other physicist of the sixties and seventies, defined the
mainstream of the physics that Feynman had reminded himself to
disregard. In so many ways these two scientific icons had come to seem
like polar opposites—the Adolphe Menjou and Walter Matthau of
theoretical physics. Gell-Mann loved to know things’ names and to
that Feynman would
pronounce 
misunderstand, or pretend to misunderstand, when Gell-Mann uttered so
simple a name as Montreal. Gell-Mann’s conversational partners often
suspected that the obscure pronunciations and cultural allusions were
designed to place them at a disadvantage. Feynman pronounced
potpourri “pot-por-eye” and interesting as if it had four syllables, and he
despised nomenclature of all kinds. Gell-Mann was an enthusiastic and
accomplished bird-watcher; the moral of one of Feynman’s classic stories
about his father was that the name of a bird did not matter, and the point
was hardly lost on Gell-Mann.

correctly—so 

correctly 

Physicists kept finding new ways to describe the contrast between them.
Murray makes sure you know what an extraordinary person he is, they
would say, while Dick is not a person at all but a more advanced life form
pretending to be human to spare your feelings. Murray was interested in
almost everything—but not the branches of science outside high-energy
physics; he was openly contemptuous of those. Dick considered all
science to be his territory—his responsibility—but remained brashly
ignorant of everything else. Some well-known physicists resented

Feynman for his cherished irresponsibility—it was, after all, irresponsibility
to his academic colleagues. A larger number disliked Gell-Mann for his
arrogance and his sharp tongue.

There was always more. Dick wore shirtsleeves, Murray wore tweed.
Murray ate at the Atheneum, the faculty club, while Dick ate at “the Greasy,”
the cafeteria. (This was only half true. Either man could be found at either
place on occasion, although Feynman, when the Atheneum still required
ties and jackets, would show up in shirtsleeves and demand the most
garish and ill-fitting of the spare items kept on hand for emergencies.)
Feynman talked with his hands—with his whole body, in fact—whereas
Gell-Mann, as the physicist and science writer Michael Riordan observed,
“sits calmly behind his desk in a plush blue swivel chair, hands folded,
never once lifting them to make a gesture… . Information is exchanged by
words and numbers, not by hands or pictures.” Riordan added:

Their personal styles spill over into their theoretical work, too. GellMann insists on mathematical rigor in all his work, often at the
expense of comprehensibility… . Where Gell-Mann disdains vague,
heuristic models that might only point the way toward a true solution,
Feynman revels in them. He believes that a certain amount of
imprecision and ambiguity is essential to communication.

Yet they were not so different in their approach to physics. Those who
knew them best as physicists felt that Gell-Mann was no more likely than
Feynman to hide behind formalism or to use mathematics as a stand-in for
physical understanding. Those who considered him pretentious about
language and cultural trivia felt nonetheless that when it came to physics he
was as honest and direct as Feynman. Over a long career Gell-Mann
made his vision not only comprehensible but irresistible. Both men were
relentless on the trail of a new idea, able to concentrate absolutely, willing
to try anything.

Both men, it seemed to a few perceptive colleagues, presented a mask
to the world. “Murray’s mask was a man of great culture,” Sidney Coleman
said. “Dick’s mask was Mr. Natural—just a little boy from the country that
could see through things the city slickers can’t.” Both men filled their masks
until reality and artifice became impossible to pry apart.

into a single scheme. 

Gell-Mann, as naturalist, collector, and categorizer, was well primed to
interpret the exploding particle universe of the 1960s. New technology in
the accelerators—liquid hydrogen bubble chambers and computers for
automating the analysis of collision tracks—seemed to have spilled open a
bulky canvas bag from which nearly a hundred distinct particles had now
tumbled forth. Gell-Mann and, independently, an Israeli theorist, Yuval
Ne’eman, found a way in 1961 to organize the various symmetries of spins
the
and strangeness 
mathematicians’ sense of the word, known as SU(3), though Gell-Mann
quickly and puckishly dubbed it the Eightfold Way. It was like an intricate
translucent object which, when held to the light, would reveal families of
eight or ten or possibly twenty-seven particles—and they would be
different, though overlapping, families, depending on which way one chose
to view it. The Eightfold Way was a new periodic table—the previous
century’s triumph in classifying and thus exposing the hidden regularities in
a similar number of disparate “elements.” But it was also a more dynamic
object. The operations of group theory were like special shuffles of a deck
of cards or the twists of a Rubik’s cube.

It was a group, 

in 

Much of SU(3)’s power came from the way it embodied a concept
increasingly central to the high-energy theorist’s way of working: the
concept of inexact symmetry, almost symmetry, near symmetry, or—the
term that won out—broken symmetry. The particle world was full of near
misses in its symmetries, a dangerous problem, since it seemed to permit
an ad hoc escape route whenever an expected relationship failed to
match. Broken symmetry implied a process, a change in status. A
symmetry in water is broken when it freezes, for now the system does not
look the same from every direction. A magnet embodies symmetry
breaking, since it has made a kind of choice of orientation. Many of the
broken symmetries of particle physics came to seem like choices the
universe made when it condensed from a hot chaos into cooler matter,
spiked as it is with so many hard-edged, asymmetrical contingencies.

Once again Gell-Mann trusted his scheme enough to predict, as a
consequence of broken symmetry, a specific hitherto-unseen particle. This,
the omega minus, duly turned up in 1964—a thirty-three-experimenter
team had to canvass more than one million feet of photographs—and GellMann’s Nobel Prize followed five years later.

His next, most famous invention came in an effort to add explanatory
understanding to the descriptive success of the Eightfold Way. SU(3)
should have had, along with its various eight-member and ten-member and
other families, a most-basic three-member family. This seemed a strange
omission. Yet the rules of the group would have required this threesome to
carry fractional electric charges: ? and – ?. Since no particle had ever
turned up with anything but unit charge, this seemed implausible even by
modern standards. Nevertheless, in 1963 Gell-Mann and, independently, a
younger Caltech theorist, George Zweig, proposed it anyway. Zweig called
his particles aces. Gell-Mann won the linguistic battle once again: his
choice, a croaking nonsense word, was quark. (After the fact, he was able
to tack on a literary antecedent when he found the phrase “Three quarks for
in Finnegans Wake, but the physicist’s quark was
Muster Mark” 
pronounced from the beginning to rhyme with “cork.”)

It took years for Gell-Mann and other theorists to generate all the
contrivances needed to make quarks work. One contrivance was a new
property called color—purely artificial, with no connection to everyday
color. Another was flavor: Gell-Mann decided that the flavors of quarks
would be called up, down, and strange. There had to be antiquarks and
anticolors. A new mediating particle called the gluon would have to carry
color from one quark to another. All this encouraged skepticism among
physicists. Julian Schwinger wrote that he supposed such particles would
be detected by “their palpitant piping, chirrup, croak, and quark.” Zweig, far
more vulnerable than Gell-Mann, felt that his career was damaged. The
quark theorists had to wrestle with the fact that their particles never
appeared anywhere, though people did begin a dedicated search in
particle accelerators and supposed cosmic-ray deposits in undersea mud.
There was a reality problem, distinctly more intense than the problem
posed by more familiar entities such as electrons. Zweig had a concrete,
dynamical view of quarks—too mechanistic for a community that had
learned as far back as Heisenberg to pay attention only to observables.
Gell-Mann’s comment to Zweig was, “The concrete quark model—that’s for
blockheads.” Gell-Mann was wary of the philosophical as well as the
sociological problem created by any assertion one way or the other about
quarks being real. For him quarks were at first a way of making a simple

toy field theory: he would investigate the theory’s properties, abstract the
appropriate general principles, and then throw away the theory. “It is fun to
speculate about the way quarks would behave if they were physical
particles of finite mass (instead of purely mathematical entities as they
would be in the limit of infinite mass),” he wrote. As if they were physical
particles; then again, as if they were conveniences of mathematics. He
encouraged “a search for stable quarks”—but added with one more twist
that it “would help reassure us of the nonexistence of real quarks.” His
initial caveats were quoted by commentators again and again in the years
that followed. One physicist’s typically uncharitable interpretation: “I always
considered that to be a coded message. It seemed to say, ‘If quarks are
not found, remember I never said they would be; if they are found,
remember I thought of them first.’” For Gell-Mann this became a permanent
source of bitterness.

Feynman, meanwhile, had disregarded so much of the decade’s highenergy physics that he had to make a long-term project of catching up. He
tried to pay more attention to experimental data than to the methods and
language of theorists. He tried, as always, to read papers only until he
understood the issue and then to work out the problem for himself. “I’ve
always taken an attitude that I have only to explain the regularities of nature
—I don’t have to explain the methods of my friends,” he told a historian
during these years. He did manage to avoid some passing fashions. Still,
he was turning back to a community after having drifted outside, and he
had to learn its shared methods after all. It was no longer possible to
approach these increasingly formidable, specialized problems as an
outsider. He had stopped teaching high-energy physics; in the late sixties
he began again. At first his syllabus contained no quarks.

By the late sixties and early seventies a new accelerator embedded in
the rolling hills near Stanford University in northern California had taken the
dominant role in the strong-interaction experiments that were so central to
the search for quarks. The Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC)
made a straight two-mile cut in the grassy landscape. Aboveground, cows
grazed and young physicists in jeans and shirts—nearly a hundred of them
—sat at picnic tables or walked in and out of the center’s many buildings.
Below, inside a knife-straight evacuated copper tube, a beam of electrons
streamed toward targets of protons. The electrons achieved energies far

greater than theorists had ever had to manage. They struck their targets
inside an end station like a giant airplane hangar and then, with luck,
entered a detector inside a concrete blockhouse, lined with lead bricks,
riding on railroad tracks and angled upward toward the ceiling. Sometimes
high-speed motion-picture cameras recorded the results, and elsewhere in
the laboratory teams of human scanners guided an automatic digitizer that
could read the particle tracks from—for a given monthlong experiment—
hundreds of millions of filmed images. A single bubble chamber at the end
of the particle beam, in its five-and-a-half-year useful lifetime, saw the
discovery of seventeen new particles.

It was a tool for exploring the strong force—so called because, at the
very short distances in the domain of the nucleus, it must dominate the
force of electromagnetic repulsion to bind protons and neutrons (hadron
was now the general term for particles that felt the strong force). Feynman
had been thinking about how to understand the working of the strong force
in collisions of hadrons with other hadrons. These were complex: at the
high energies now available for studying short distances, hadron-hadron
collisions produced gloriously messy sprays of detritus. The hadrons
themselves were neither simple nor pointlike. They had size, and they
seemed to have internal constituents—a whole swarming zoo of them. As
Feynman said, the hadron-hadron work was like trying to figure out a
pocket watch by smashing two of them together and watching the pieces
fly out. He began visiting SLAC regularly in the summer of 1968, however,
and saw how much simpler was the interaction offered by electron-proton
collisions, the electron tearing through the proton like a bullet.

He stayed with his sister; she had moved to the Stanford area to work
for a research laboratory, and her house was just across Sand Hill Road
from the accelerator center. The physicists who would gather on the
outdoor patio to listen to his stories that summer would see him slamming
his open hands together in a boisterous illustration of a new idea he had.
He was talking about “pancakes”—flat particle pancakes with hard objects
embedded in them.

The Caltech connection was important to experimenters at SLAC, and
by the late sixties the connection meant Gell-Mann far more than Feynman.
Gell-Mann had created the scientific subculture of current algebra, the
mathematical framework surrounding his quarks, and SLAC theorists

thought of themselves as trying to generalize these tools to smaller
distances, higher energies. At accelerators like SLAC, most of the thinking
focused on the simplest reactions—two particles in, two particles out—
although most of the actual collisions produced enormous flashes of many
more particles. Experimenters wanted the most precise possible data, and
precision was impossible in these bursts of detritus. Feynman chose a
different point of view. He introduced a formalism in which one could look
at the distributions of twenty or fifty or more particles. One did not have to
be able to measure the momentum of each particle; in effect one could
sum over all the possibilities. A Stanford theorist, James D. Bjorken, had
been thinking along similar lines. An electron hits a proton; an electron
comes out, along with a burst of immeasurable fragments. The emerging
electron was a common factor. Bjorken decided to set aside the
miscellaneous spray and simply plot the distribution of the energies and
angles of the emerging electrons, averaged over many collisions.

He isolated a remarkable regularity in the data, a phenomenon he called
“scaling”—the data looked the same at different energy scales. He did not
know just how to interpret this. He had a variety of guesses, most framed in
the language of current algebra. When Feynman arrived, Bjorken
happened to be away; Feynman saw the graphed data without hearing a
clear explanation of its origin. He suddenly recognized it, however, and he
calculated long into the evening. It could be viewed as a graph of his
pancake theory, the theory he had been toying with all summer on his own.
He had decided to cut through the incalculable swarming muddle of
proton pieces by positing a mysterious new constituent that he called a
parton, a name based inelegantly on the word part. (Finally he had an entry
of his own in the Oxford English Dictionary.) Feynman made almost no
assumptions about his partons except two: they were pointlike, and they
did not interact meaningfully with one another but floated freely about
inside the proton. They were an abstraction—just the kind of unobservable
entity that physicists hoped not to have to fall back on—yet they were
tantalizingly visual in spirit. They were pegs on which to hang a field theory
of the old, manageable sort, with wave functions and calculable probability
amplitudes. By analogy, quantum electrodynamics had its partons, too: the
bare electrons and photons.

Feynman showed that collisions with these hard nuggets inside the

proton would produce the scaling relations in a natural manner, unlike
collisions with the puffy whole proton. He chose not to decide what
quantum numbers they did or did not carry, and he most emphatically
decided not to worry one way or the other about whether his partons were
the fractionally charged quarks of Gell-Mann and Zweig.

By the time Bjorken returned, he found the theory group awash in
partons. Feynman buttonholed him. He had idolized Feynman ever since
taking an old-fashioned, historically organized quantum electrodynamics
course at Stanford. “When Feynman diagrams arrived,” he said, “it was the
sun breaking through the clouds, complete with rainbow and pot of gold.
Brilliant! Physical and profound!” Now here was Feynman in the flesh,
explaining Bjorken’s own theory to him with a new language and a new
visual image. As he could instantly see, Feynman’s essential insight was to
place himself once again in the electron, to see what the electron would
see at light speed. He would see the protons flashing toward him—and
they were therefore flattened relativistically into pancakes. Relativity also
slowed their internal clocks, in effect, and, from the electron’s point of view,
froze the partons into immobility. His scheme reduced the messy
interaction of an electron with a fog of different particles to a much simpler
interaction of an electron with a single pointlike parton emerging from the
fog. Bjorken’s scaling pattern flowed directly from the physics of this
picture. The experimenters grasped it instantly.

The parton model was oversimplified. It explained nothing that Bjorken
could not explain, although Bjorken’s explanation seemed 
less
fundamental. Partons required considerable hand-waving. Yet physicists
clutched at them like a lifeboat. Three years passed before Feynman
published a formal paper and many more before his partons finally and
definitively blended with quarks in the understanding of physicists.

Zweig’s aces, Gell-Mann’s quarks, and Feynman’s partons became
three paths to the same destination. These constituents of matter served
as the quanta of a new field, finally making possible a field theory of the
strong force. Quarks had not been seen or detected in the direct fashion of
more venerable particles. They became real nonetheless. Feynman took
on a project in 1970 with two students, assembling a vast catalog of
particle data in an effort to make a judgment about whether a simple quark
model could underlie it all. He chose an unconventional model once again,

using data that let him think in terms of the electromagnetic field theory of
the last generation, instead of the hadron-collision data that interested
most theorists. For whatever reason, he was persuaded—converted into a
quarkerian, as he said—although he continued to stress the tentativeness
of any one model. “A quark picture may ultimately pervade the entire field
of hadron physics,” this paper concluded. “About the paradoxes of the
quark model we have nothing to add, except perhaps to make these
paradoxes more poignant by exhibiting the mysteriously good fit of a
peculiar model.” Younger theorists learned how to explain confinement—
the quark’s inability to appear as free particles—in terms of a force that
grew rapidly with distance, in strange contrast to forces such as gravity and
electromagnetism. Quarks became real not only because ingenious
experiments gave an indirect look at them, but because it became harder
and harder for theorists to construct a coherent model in which they did not
figure. They became so real that Gell-Mann, their inventor, had to endure
the after-the-fact criticism that he had not fully believed in them. He never
understood why Feynman had created his own alternative quark and
maintained a distinction that faded in the end. He missed no opportunity to
call Feynman’s particles “put-ons.” Like Schwinger years before, he
disliked the fanfare over a picture that he thought was oversimplified—
anyone could use it.

Quarks were real, at least to physicists of the last years of this century.
Partons were not, in the end. What is real? Feynman tried to keep this
question from disappearing into the background. In a book assembled
from his lectures, Photon-Hadron Interactions, he concluded:

We have built a very tall house of cards making so many weakly
based conjectures one upon the other… . Even if our house of cards
survives and proves to be right we have not thereby proved the
existence of partons… . On the other hand, the partons would have
been a useful psychological guide … and if they continued to serve
this way to produce other valid expectations they would of course
begin to become “real,” possibly as real as any other theoretical
structure invented to describe nature.

Once again Feynman had placed himself at the center of modern

theoretical physics. His language, his framework, dominated high-energy
physicists’ discourse for several years. He wanted to move on again, or so
he told himself. “I’m a little bit frustrated,” he said to a historian soon after
he published his first parton paper.

I’m tired of thinking of the same thing. I need to think of something
else. Because I got stuck—see, if it would keep going it would be all
right, but it’s hard to get any new results… . This parton thing has been
so successful that I have become fashionable. I have to find an
unfashionable thing to do.

Feynman routinely refused to recommend colleagues for the Nobel
Prize, but he broke his rule in 1977—after Gell-Mann had already won the
prize once—and quietly nominated Gell-Mann and Zweig for their invention
of quarks.

Teaching the Young

RICHARD. [Humming softly to himself] Jee-jee-jee-ju-ju. Jee-jee-jee-juju. [He is working. Dishes are being cleared from the breakfast
table. A tape recorder makes a faint whirr as it eavesdrops: a
friend has taken to leaving it running in hopes of capturing stories
about Feynman’s past.] Jee-jee-jee-ju-ju. [Stops abruptly.] There’s
some fool has made a mistake here. Some damn fool made a
mistake here.

MICHELLE. Prob’ly you.
RICHARD. Me? What do you mean, me? [Pause.] Some idiot has

made an error. [Sings] I have an idiot here who made an error.

MICHELLE. Yeah—you!
RICHARD. Michelle, dear, be careful what you say. After all your father
is a nice fellow and he doesn’t want that kind of trouble. [Pause.]
He’s made a mis-too-ko. You know, mistookos happen. You know.
You don’t want your daddy to be a bad boy. [ Drums a sharp tattoo
with his fingers.] That is of course wrong! As any fool can see.

It took years for Feynman’s children to realize that their father was not like
other fathers. He seemed normally distracted, lounging in his dog-chewed
recliner or lying on the floor, writing on notepads, humming to himself in
flights of concentration that were hard to break through. He doted on them
and told them fantastically imaginative stories. In one ongoing saga they
became tiny inhabitants of a gigantic household world; Feynman would
describe the forest of brown leafless trees rising around them, for example,
until suddenly they would guess that those were the fibers of the carpet. Or
he would hold them on his lap and say, “What do you know about? You
know about concrete and you know about rubber and you know about
glass …” He taught them what he considered the basics of economics:
that when prices go up, people buy less; that manufacturers set prices to
maximize profits; that economists know very little. There were times when
they thought he had been placed on earth mainly to embarrass them in
public—pretending to beat them about the head with a newspaper or
talking to waiters in his mock Italian. He was always what Michelle thought
of as borderline boisterous, singing and whistling to himself. He would
make up rhymes under his breath as he walked around the house—“I’m
going to pick up my shoe, that’s what I’m going to do”—and when
challenged he would be unable to repeat what he had just said. Belatedly it
dawned on them that not all their friends could look up their fathers in the
encyclopedia. His own mother was still alive, and he seemed to revert to a
child in her presence. Lucille would say, “Richard, I’m cold—would you
please put on a sweater?” When Omni magazine called him the world’s
smartest man, she remarked, “If that’s the world’s smartest man, God help
us.”

Carl showed an early gift for science, to Feynman’s immense delight.
When he was twelve, Feynman showed him an odd-looking photograph he
had brought home from a Canadian laboratory and Carl guessed—
correctly—that it was “probably a diffraction pattern from a laser from a
regular pattern of square holes,” and Feynman could not help boasting to a
friend, “I could have killed him—I was afraid to ask him for the focal length
of the lens used!” He tried not to prod too clumsily, and he told himself that
he would be happy with any careers his children chose (“trumpet playing—
social worker—zygophalatelist—or whatever,” he wrote Carl), as long as
they were happy and good at what they did. When Carl reached college,

however—MIT—he found the one career ambition guaranteed to break his
father’s equilibrium. “Well,” Feynman wrote, “after much effort at
understanding I have gradually begun to accept your decision to become a
philosopher.” But he hadn’t. He felt as betrayed and put upon as a
business executive whose child wants to be a poet.

I find myself asking, “How can you be a good philosopher?” I see
now that, like the poet son who never thinks of money (because he
expects his old man to pay) you have chosen philosophy, over clear
thought (and so your old man goes on with his clear thoughts) so that
you can fly above common sense to far higher and more beautiful
aspects of the intellect.

“Well,” he added sarcastically, “it must be wonderful to be able to do
that.” Educating his children made him think again about the elements of
teaching and about the lessons his own father had taught. By the time Carl
was four, Feynman was actively lobbying against a first-grade science
book proposed for California schools. It began with pictures of a
mechanical wind-up dog, a real dog, and a motorcycle, and for each the
same question: “What makes it move?” The proposed answer—“Energy
makes it move”—enraged him.

That was tautology, he argued—empty definition. Feynman, having
made a career of understanding the deep abstractions of energy, said it
would be better to begin a science course by taking apart a toy dog,
revealing the cleverness of the gears and ratchets. To tell a first-grader that
“energy makes it move” would be no more helpful, he said, than saying
“God makes it move” or “moveability makes it move.” He proposed a
simple test for whether one is teaching ideas or mere definitions:

You say, “Without using the new word which you have just learned,
try to rephrase what you have just learned in your own language.
Without using the word energy, tell me what you know now about the
dog’s motion.”

Other standard explanations were just as hollow: gravity makes it fall, or
friction makes it wear out. Having tried to impart fundamental knowledge to

Caltech freshmen, he also believed it was possible to teach real
knowledge to first-graders. “Shoe leather wears out because it rubs
against the sidewalk and the little notches and bumps on the sidewalk grab
pieces and pull them off.” That is knowledge. “To simply say, ‘It is because
of friction,’ is sad, because it’s not science.”

Feynman taught thirty-four formal courses during his Caltech career,
roughly one a year. Most were graduate seminars called Advanced
Quantum Mechanics or Topics in Theoretical Physics. That often meant his
current research interest: graduate students sometimes heard, without
realizing it, the first and last report of substantial work that another physicist
would have published. For almost two decades he also taught a course,
listed in no catalog, known as Physics X: one afternoon a week,
undergraduates would gather to pose any scientific question they wished,
and Feynman would improvise. His effect on these students was immense;
they often left the Lauritsen Laboratory basement feeling that they had had
a private pipeline to an oracle with an earthy kind of omniscience. He
believed—in the face of the increasing esotericism of his own subject—
that true understanding implied a kind of clarity. A physicist once asked
him to explain in simple terms a standard item of the dogma, why spinone-half particles obey Fermi-Dirac statistics. Feynman promised to
prepare a freshman lecture on it. For once, he failed. “I couldn’t reduce it to
the freshman level,” he said a few days later, and added, “That means we
really don’t understand it.”

It was his own children, however, who crystallized many of his attitudes
toward teaching. In 1964 he had made the rare decision to serve on a
public commission, responsible for choosing mathematics textbooks for
California’s grade schools. Traditionally this commissionership was a
sinecure that brought various small perquisites under the table from
textbook publishers. Few commissioners—as Feynman discovered—read
many textbooks, but he determined to read them all, and had scores of
them delivered to his house. This was the era of the so-called new
mathematics in children’s education: the much-debated effort to modernize
the teaching of mathematics by introducing such high-level concepts as set
theory and nondecimal number systems. New math swept the nation’s
schools startlingly fast, in the face of parental nervousness that was
captured in a New Yorker cartoon: “You see, Daddy,” a little girl explains,

“this set equals all the dollars you earned; your expenses are a sub-set
within it. A sub-set of that is your deductions.”

Feynman did not take the side of the modernizers. Instead, he poked a
blade into the new-math bubble. He argued to his fellow commissioners
that sets, as presented in the reformers’ textbooks, were an example of the
most insidious pedantry: new definitions for the sake of definition, a perfect
case of introducing words without introducing ideas. A proposed primer
instructed first-graders: “Find out if the set of the lollipops is equal in
number to the set of the girls.” Feynman described this as a disease. It
removed clarity without adding any precision to the normal sentence: “Find
out if there are just enough lollipops for the girls.” Specialized language
should wait until it is needed, he said, and the peculiar language of set
theory never is needed. He found that the new textbooks did not reach the
areas in which set theory does begin to contribute content beyond the
definitions: the understanding of different degrees of infinity, for example.

It is an example of the use of words, new definitions of new words,
but in this particular case a most extreme example because no facts
whatever are given… . It will perhaps surprise most people who have
studied this textbook to discover that the symbol ? or ? representing
union and intersection of sets … all the elaborate notation for sets that
is given in these books, almost never appear in any writings in
theoretical physics, in engineering, business, arithmetic, computer
design, or other places where mathematics is being used.

Feynman could not make his real point without drifting into philosophy. It
was crucial, he argued, to distinguish clear 
from precise
language. The textbooks placed a new emphasis on precise language:
distinguishing “number” from “numeral,” for example, and separating the
symbol from the real object in the modern critical fashion—pilpul for
schoolchildren, it seemed to Feynman. He objected to a book that tried to
teach a distinction between a ball and a picture of a ball—the book
insisting on such language as “color the picture of the ball red.”

language 

“I doubt that any child would make an error in this particular direction,”

Feynman said dryly.

As a matter of fact, it is impossible to be precise … whereas
before there was no difficulty. The picture of a ball includes a circle
and includes a background. Should we color the entire square area in
which the ball image appears all red? … Precision has only been
pedantically increased in one particular corner when there was
originally no doubt and no difficulty in the idea.

In the real world, he pointed out once again, absolute precision is an ideal
that can never be reached. Nice distinctions should be reserved for the
times when doubt arises.

Feynman had his own ideas for reforming the teaching of mathematics
to children. He proposed that first-graders learn to add and subtract more
or less the way he worked out complicated integrals—free to select any
method that seems suitable for the problem at hand. A modern-sounding
notion was, The answer isn’t what matters, so long as you use the right
method. To Feynman no educational philosophy could have been more
wrong. The answer is all that does matter, he said. He listed some of the
techniques available to a child making the transition from being able to
count to being able to add. A child can combine two groups into one and
simply count the combined group: to add 5 ducks and 3 ducks, one counts
8 ducks. The child can use fingers or count mentally: 6, 7, 8. One can
memorize the standard combinations. Larger numbers can be handled by
making piles—one groups pennies into fives, for example—and counting
the piles. One can mark numbers on a line and count off the spaces—a
in understanding
method 
measurement and fractions. One can write larger numbers in columns and
carry sums larger than 10.

that becomes useful, Feynman noted, 

To Feynman the standard texts seemed too rigid. The problem 29 + 3
was considered a third-grade problem, because it required the advanced
technique of carrying; yet Feynman pointed out that a first-grader could
handle it by thinking 30, 31, 32. Why should children not be given simple
algebra problems (2 times what plus 3 is 7?) and encouraged to solve
them by trial and error? That is how real scientists work.

We must remove the rigidity of thought… . We must leave freedom
for the mind to wander about in trying to solve the problems… . The

successful user of mathematics is practically an inventor of new ways
of obtaining answers in given situations. Even if the ways are well
known, it is usually much easier for him to invent his own way—a new
way or an old way—than it is to try to find it by looking it up.

Better to have a jumbled bag of tricks than any one orthodox method. That
was how he taught his own children at homework time. Michelle learned
that he had a thousand shortcuts; also that they tended to get her into
trouble with her arithmetic teachers.

Do You Think You Can Last On Forever?

Although he had never liked athletic activity, he tried to stay fit. After he
broke a kneecap falling over a Chicago curb, he took up jogging. He ran
almost daily up and down the steep paths above his house in the Altadena
hills. He owned a wet suit and swam often at the beachfront house in
Mexico that he had bought with his Nobel Prize money. (It had been a
shambles when he and Gweneth first saw it. He told her that they did not
want it. She looked at the glass wall facing the warm currents sweeping up
from the Tropic of Cancer and replied, “Oh yes, we do.”)

Traveling in the Swiss Alps in the summer of 1977, he frightened
Gweneth by suddenly running to the bathroom of their cabin and vomiting—
something he never did as an adult. Later that day he passed out in the
that year his physician diagnosed “fever of
téléphérique. Twice 
undetermined origin.” It was not until October 1978 that cancer was
discovered: a tumor that had grown to the size of a melon, weighing six
pounds, in the back of his abdomen. A bulge was visible at his waistline
when he stood straight. He had ignored the symptoms for too long. He had
had other worries: just months before, Gweneth had herself undergone
surgery for cancer. Feynman’s tumor pushed his intestines aside and
destroyed his left kidney, his left adrenal gland, and his spleen.

It was a rare cancer of the soft fat and connective tissue, a myxoid
liposarcoma. After difficult surgery, he left the hospital looking gaunt and
began a search of the medical literature. There he found no shortage of
probabilistic estimates. The likelihood of a recurrent tumor was high,

though his had appeared well encapsulated. He read a series of individual
case studies, none with a tumor as large as his. “Five-year survival rates,”
one journal said in summary, “have been reported from 0% to 11%, with
one report of 41%.” Almost no one survived ten years.

He returned to work. “You are old, Father Feynman,” wrote a young

friend in a mocking bit of verse,

 “And your hair has turned visibly gray;
And yet you keep tossing ideas around—
 At your age, a disgraceful display!”

“In my youth,” said the Master, as he shook his long locks,
 “I took a great fancy to sketching;
I drew many diagrams, which most thought profound
 While others thought just merely fetching.”

“Yes, I know,” said the youth, interrupting the sage,
 “That you once were so awfully clever;
But now is the time for quark sausage with chrome.
 Do you think you can last on forever?”

Younger physicists, including Gell-Mann, had already stepped aside from
the research frontier, but Feynman turned to problems in quantum
chromodynamics—the latest synthesis of field theories, so named
because of the central role of quark color. With a postdoctoral student,
Richard Field, he studied the very-high-energy details of quark jets. Other
theorists had realized that the reason quarks never emerged freely was
that they were confined by a force unlike those with which physics was
familiar. Most forces diminished with distance—gravity and magnetism, for
example. It seemed obvious that this must be so, but the opposite was true
for quarks. When they were close together, the force between them was
negligible; when they were drawn apart, the force grew extremely strong.
Jets, as Feynman and Field understood them, were a by-product. In a highenergy collision, before a quark could be broken free of these bonds, the
force would become so great that it would create new particles, pulling
them into existence out of the vacuum in a burst traveling in the same

direction—a jet.

At first Field met with Feynman one afternoon a week. Feynman did not
realize that Field was spending almost every waking hour preparing for
their meeting. Their work took the form of predictions in a language well
suited to experimenters. It was not abstruse theory but a realistic guide to
what experimenters should see. Feynman insisted that they calculate only
experiments that had not yet been performed; otherwise, he said, they
would not be able to trust themselves. Gradually they found that they were
able to stay a few months ahead of the experiments and provide a useful
framework. As the accelerators reached higher energies, jets of the kind
Feynman and Field had described came into existence.

Theorists meanwhile continued to struggle with their understanding of
quark confinement: whether quarks must always be confined under every
circumstance and whether confinement could be derived naturally from the
theory. Victor Weisskopf urged Feynman to work on this, too, by saying
that all he could see in the literature was formal mathematics. “I don’t get
any physics out of it. Why don’t you attack the problem? You are just the
right guy for it and you would find the essential physical reasons why QCD
confines the quarks.” Feynman made an original effort in 1981 to solve this
problem analytically in a toy model of two dimensions. Quantum
chromodynamics, as he noted, had become a theory of such internal
complexity that usually even the fastest supercomputers could not generate
specific predictions to compare with experiments. “QCD field theory with
six flavors of quarks with three colors, each represented by a Dirac spinor
of four components, and with eight four-vector gluons, is a quantum theory
of amplitudes for configurations each of which is 104 numbers at each
point in space and time,” he wrote. “To visualize all this qualitatively is too
difficult.” So he tried removing a dimension. This turned out to be a blind
alley, although the freshness of his approach kept the work on some
theorists’ reading lists long after they had passed by its conclusions.

In September 1981 a tumor recurred, this time entwined about
Feynman’s intestines. The doctors tried a combination of doxorubicin,
radiation treatment, and heat therapy. Then he underwent his second major
surgery. The radiation had left his tissues spongy. The surgery lasted
fourteen and a half hours and involved what the physicians described
euphemistically as a “vascular incident”—his aorta split. An emergency

request for blood went out at Caltech and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
and donors lined up. Feynman needed seventy-eight pints. When
Caltech’s president, Marvin Goldberger, entered his hospital room
afterward, Feynman said, “I’d rather be where I am than where you are”
and added that he still was not going to do anything Goldberger asked. In
visible pain, he entertained his hospital visitors with new stories. Before
the operation, the surgeon, Donald Morton of the UCLA Medical Center,
had appeared with a halo of residents and nurses. Feynman asked what
his chances were. “It’s impossible to talk about the probability of a single
event,” he recounted the surgeon as saying, and he replied, “From one
professor to another, it is possible if it’s a future event.”

Caltech’s influence in physics had waned. It drew the same extraordinary
collection of bright, naïve, gangly undergraduates, all assuming that they
would be taking graduate courses by their junior years. The best graduate
students, however, went elsewhere. The physics colloquium remained an
institution—Feynman usually sitting like a magnet in the front row, capable
of dominating every session, visitors knew, entertainingly or ruthlessly. He
could reduce an unwary speaker to tears. He shocked colleagues by
tearing the flesh off an elderly Werner Heisenberg, made the young
relativist Kip Thorne physically ill—the stories reminded older physicists of
Pauli (“ganz falsch”). Douglas Hofstadter, a pioneer 
in artificial
intelligence, gave an unusual talk on the slippery uses of analogy. He
began by asking the audience to name the First Lady of England, looking
for such answers as Margaret Thatcher, Queen Elizabeth, or Denis
Thatcher. “My wife,” came the cry from the front row. Why? “Because she’s
English and she’s great.” Through the rest of his talk, it seemed to
Hofstadter that Feynman continued heckling in the manner of the village
idiot. He was no less an institution than ever, but the center of gravity of
elementary particle physics had drifted eastward again, toward Harvard
theory of
and Princeton and other universities. A combined 
electromagnetism and weak interactions had led to the gauge theories that
brought together the strong interactions under the same quantumchromodynamical umbrella. This resurgence of quantum theory also
brought a new appreciation of Feynman’s path integrals, because path
integrals proved essential in quantizing the gauge theories. Feynman’s
discovery now seemed not just a useful tool but an organizing principle at

nature’s deepest levels. Yet he did not pursue the new implications of path
integrals himself. At the forefront were such theorists as Steven Weinberg,
Abdus Salam, Sheldon Glashow, and younger colleagues who had seen
neither Feynman nor Gell-Mann as the magnets they had once been.
Caltech physicists, concerned about the loss of their department’s
preeminence, sometimes blamed Feynman for not involving himself
enough in hiring and Gell-Mann for involving himself too much.

Ever since his return to high-energy physics with his parton model,
Feynman had been struggling against the pull of gray-eminence, elderstatesman status. In 1974 he replied unnecessarily to a standard
departmental inquiry by writing a one-sentence memorandum: “I have not
accomplished anything this year in the way of research!” Two years later,
when a friend, Sidney Coleman, put him on the participant list for a
quantum field theory conference sponsored by Werner Erhard’s est
Foundation, Feynman summed up his ambivalence about his insider and
outsider status by replying in Groucho Marx fashion:

What the hell is Feynman invited for? He is not up to the other guys
and is doing nothing as far as I know. If you clean up the invitation list,
to just the hard-core workers, I might begin to think about attending.

Coleman duly removed him from the list, and Feynman attended.

He was untroubled by the association with est’s vaguely humbug sixtiesinspired self-improvement seminars, suffused though they were with the
pseudoscientific jargon that he ordinarily despised—“another piece of
evidence,” as Coleman had said, “that we are living in the Golden Age of
Silliness.” Erhard’s organization and other postsixties institutions were
attracted to quantum theory for what appeared—misleadingly—to be a
mystical view of reality, reminiscent, they thought, of Eastern religions and
anyway more intriguing than the old-fashioned view that things are more or
less what they seem. Such organizations, struggling to emerge from the
sixties as ongoing business enterprises, were attracted to quantum
physicists for the respectability they could lend. Meanwhile, Feynman was
drawn to Erhard and other “flaky people”—as Gweneth referred to some of
his new friends—partly because curiosity and nonconformity had long been
his own trademarks. The youth movements of the sixties had caught up

with him. They had brought his own style into vogue—his tieless, pompfree outlook, the persona that he and Carl privately spoke of as
“aggressive dopiness.” He grew his graying hair in a long mane. As much
as he reviled organized psychology for what he considered its slippery use
of the forms and methods of experimental science, he loved the
introspective, self-examining kind of psychology. He let not only Werner
Erhard but also John Lilly, an aficionado of dolphins and sensorydeprivation tanks, befriend him. He tried to ignore what he called Lilly’s
“mystic hokey-poke” but nonetheless submerged himself in his tanks in the
hope of having hallucinations, just as he had tried so hard to observe his
own dream states forty years before. Death was not far from his thoughts.
He recovered the earliest childhood memories he could dredge from his
mind. He tried marijuana and (he was more embarrassed about this) LSD.
He listened patiently as Baba Ram Das, the former Richard Alpert of
Harvard, author of the cult book Be Here Now, instructed him on how to
attain out-of-body experiences. He practiced these—OBE’s, in the current
jargon—not willing to believe any of the mystical paraphernalia but happy
and interested to imagine his ego floating here or there, outside himself,
outside the room, outside the sixty-five-year-old body that was failing him
so grievously.

Physicists did not make natural hippies. They had played too great a
role in creating the technology-worshiping, nuclear-shadowed culture
against which the counterculture set itself. When Feynman spoke now
about his experience in the Manhattan Project, he stressed more than ever
his cracking of safes and baiting of censors. He was more a rebel than an
ambitious and effective group leader. Other people, “people in higher
echelons,” made the decisions, he said, prefacing a 1975 talk at Santa
Barbara. “I worried about no big decisions. I was always flittering about
underneath.” He was hardly an enemy of technology; nor, despite his
distaste for the bureaucracy of science, was he an enemy of what was now
called the military-industrial complex. He had always refused to attach his
name to Caltech’s grant proposals to the federal funding agencies that
kept all university physics departments solvent. Still, he would emerge from
Lilly’s sensory-deprivation tank, rinse off the Epsom salts in the shower,
dress, and drive over to Hughes Aircraft Company, a military contractor, to
deliver lectures on physics. He was not guarding his time as he had in the

past. Sporadically, he worked for Hughes and several other companies as
a consultant; he advised Hughes on a neural-net project sponsored by the
Department of Defense and consulted with 3M Company engineers on
nonlinear optical materials. For less than four hours of conversation he
earned fifteen hundred dollars. These were scattered jobs, chosen with no
special thought. Many of his colleagues arranged their consulting far more
carefully and earned far more money. Feynman’s clients often seemed
more grateful for the thrill of meeting him than for any particular technical
contribution he made. He knew he was no businessman. He was Caltech’s
highest paid professor, along with Gell-Mann; but Caltech kept all the
royalties from The Feynman Lectures on Physics. When his old friend
Philip Morrison sent him an advertisement for “seventeen towering lectures
by two physics giants,” available from Time-Life Films, he wondered
whether Morrison received any royalties. “I don’t,” Feynman said. “Are we
physics giants business dwarfs?”

His favorite extracurricular patron in the early 1980s was the Esalen
Institute at Big Sur on the California coast, a hub for many varieties of selfactualization, self-enrichment, and self-fulfillment: Rolfing, Gestalt therapy,
yoga, meditation. Under the giant trees on cliffs overlooking the Pacific
were the original hot tubs, fed by natural sulfur springs. For its many
patrons Esalen offered an expensive form of relaxation—a “lube job for the
mind,” as Tom Wolfe once put it. Feynman described it as a hotbed of
antiscience: 
types of
awareness, ESP, and so forth.” He became a regular visitor. He soaked in
the hot tubs, stared gleefully at the nude young women sunbathing, and
learned to give massages. He gave some of his standard lectures,
adjusted to fit the mental state of the audience. Barefoot, with his thin legs
emerging from khaki shorts, he began his “Tiny Machines” talk:

“mysticism, expanded consciousness, new 

It has to do with the question of how small can you make
machinery. Okay? That’s the subject. Because I’ve heard people
around, in the baths, saying, “Tiny machines? What’s he talking
about?” and I say to them, “You know, very small machines” [pinching
an invisible tiny machine between thumb and forefinger] and it doesn’t
work. [Pause.]

I am talking about very—tiny—machines. Okay?

And on he would go, to occasional cries of “All right!” from the audience. In
the question period, the conversation would invariably turn to antigravity
devices, antimatter, and faster-than-light travel—if not in the world of
physicists then in the spiritual world. Feynman always answered soberly,
explaining that faster-than-light travel was impossible, antimatter was
routine, and antigravity devices were unlikely—except, as he said, “that
pillow and the floor under your behind will support you effectively for a long
time.” For several years he conducted a workshop in “idiosyncratic
thinking.” Esalen’s catalog copy promised a route to “peace of mind and
enjoyment of life’s contradictions” and added: “You are invited to bring
rhythm instruments.”

Late in spring 1984, on his way to pick up one of the first available IBM
personal computers in Pasadena, he leapt excitedly out of his car, tripped
on the sidewalk, and struck his head on the side of the building. A
passerby told him he had a gory enough gash to go to the hospital for
stitches. For a few days he felt fuzzy, but he told himself nothing was wrong.
More days went by. It seemed to Gweneth that he was behaving
strangely. He awoke in the night and wandered through Michelle’s room.
He spent forty-five minutes one day looking for his car, which was parked
outside the house. At the house of a model he was drawing, he suddenly
undressed and tried to go to sleep; she anxiously told him that he was not
at his own home. Finally, after beginning a classroom lecture, he suddenly
realized he was speaking disjointed nonsense. He stopped, apologized,
and left the room.

A scan of his brain revealed a massive subdural hematoma, slow
bleeding inside the skull that was putting strong pressure on the brain
tissue. The doctors sent him directly into surgery, where the standard
procedure was performed at once: two holes drilled through the cranium to
drain the liquid. By the early hours of the next morning Gweneth was
relieved to find him sitting up and speaking normally. He had no memory of
the lost three weeks. Afterward the specialist who had performed the scan
repeated it to rule out a recurrence. He could not resist scrutinizing this
remarkably detailed image of Feynman’s brain, the convoluted gray tissue,
the wrapped bundles of nerve fiber (“But you can’t see what I am thinking,”
Feynman told him), looking for a sign of something different from all the

other sixty-five-year-old brains he had scanned. Were the blood vessels
larger? The doctor was not sure.

Surely You’re Joking!

Feynman had begun to have autobiographical thoughts around the time of
the Nobel Prize. Historians came by to record his recollections, and they
treated his notes as artifacts too important to be piled in boxes or strewn
about on the shelves in the home office he had made in his basement.
Sitting there was Arithmetic for the Practical Man, a relic of his childhood.
He still had the adolescent notebook he had sent back and forth to T. A.
Welton in the course of reinventing early quantum mechanics. Interviewers
set up tape recorders to capture every word of the same stories he had
entertained his friends with for decades.

An MIT historian, Charles Weiner, persuaded him to cooperate in what
became the most thorough and serious of his interviews. For a while
Feynman considered collaborating with Weiner on a biography. They sat in
Feynman’s screened back patio while Carl played in a tree house nearby.
He not only told his stories but also demonstrated them: “Okay, start your
watch,” he told Weiner; then, after they had conversed for eight minutes
and forty-two seconds, he interrupted himself and said, “Eight minutes
forty-two seconds.” After many hours the conversation sometimes grew
intimate. He rummaged through one box and pulled out a photograph of
Arline, reclining almost nude, wearing only translucent lingerie. He almost
wept. They shut off the tape recorder and remained silent for a time.
Feynman kept most of those memories to himself even now.

He began dating his scientific notes as he worked, something he had
never done before. Weiner once remarked casually that his new parton
notes represented “a record of the day-to-day work,” and Feynman reacted
sharply.

“I actually did the work on the paper,” he said.
“Well,” Weiner said, “the work was done in your head, but the record of it

is still here.”

“No, it’s not a record, not really. It’s working. You have to work on paper,
and this is the paper. Okay?” It was true that he wrote in astonishing

volume as he worked—long trains of thought, almost suitable to serve
immediately as lecture notes.

He told Weiner that he had never read a scientific biography he had
liked. He thought he would be portrayed either as a bloodless intellectual
or a bongo-playing clown. He vacillated and finally let the idea drop. Still,
he sat for interviews with historians interested in Far Rockaway and Los
Alamos and filled out questionnaires for psychologists interested in
creativity. (“Is your scientific problem-solving accompanied by any of the
following?” He checked visual images, kinesthetic feelings, and
emotional feelings and added “(1) acoustic images, (2) talk to self.” Under
“major illnesses” he reported: “Too much to list… . Only adverse effects are
laziness during recovery period.”)

For several years he had played drums regularly with a young friend,
Ralph Leighton, the son of another Caltech physicist. Leighton had begun
taping their sessions, and then he began taping the stories Feynman
would tell. He urged him on, calling him Chief and begging to hear the
same stories again and again. Feynman told them: how he became known
in Far Rockaway as the boy who fixed radios by thinking; how he asked a
Princeton librarian for the map of the cat; how his father taught him to see
through the tricks of circus mind readers; how he outwitted painters,
mathematicians, philosophers, and psychiatrists. Or he would just ramble
while Leighton listened. “Today I went over to the Huntington Medical
Library,” he said one day—his remaining kidney was presenting problems.
“But it’s all interesting, how the kidney works, and everything else. You want
me to tell you some interesting things? The damn kidney is the craziest
thing in the world!”

Gradually a manuscript began to take shape. Leighton transcribed the
tapes and presented them to Feynman for editing. Feynman had strong
views about the structure of each story; Leighton realized that Feynman
had developed a routine of improvisational performance in which he knew
the order and pacing of every laugh. They consciously worked on the key
themes. Feynman talked about Arline’s having embarrassed him with a
box of “Richard darling, I love you! Putzie” pencils:

RICHARD. And the next morning, all right? Next morning, in the mail,
there’s this letter, all right, this postcard, which starts out, “What’s

the idea of trying to cut the name off the pencils?”

RALPH. [Laughs] Oh, boy! [Laughs.]
RICHARD. “What do you care what other people think?”
RALPH. Oh, this is——Yeah, this is a good theme.
RICHARD. Hmmm?
RALPH. This is a good theme, because there’s a theme in here. You

know, what other people think …

They knew they had a remarkable central figure, a scientist who prided
himself not on his achievements in science—these remained deep in the
background—but on his ability to see through fraud and pretense and to
master everyday life. He underscored these qualities with an exaggerated
humility; he took the tone of a boy calling the grownups Mr. and Mrs. and
asking politely dangerous questions. He was Holden Caulfield, a plain old
straight shooter trying to figure out why so many other people are phonies.
“Pompous fools—guys who are fools and are covering it all over and
impressing people as to how wonderful they are with all this hocus pocus—
THAT, I CANNOT STAND!” Feynman said. “An ordinary fool isn’t a faker;
an honest fool is all right. But a dishonest fool is terrible!”

His favorite sort of triumph in the world of these stories came in the
realm of everyday cleverness—as when he arrived at a North Carolina
airport, late for a meeting of relativists, and worked out how to get help
from a taxi dispatcher:

“Listen,” I said to the dispatcher. “The main meeting began
yesterday, so there were a whole lot of guys going to the meeting who
must have come through here yesterday. Let me describe them to
you: They would have their heads kind of in the air, and they would be
talking to each other, not paying attention to where they were going,
saying things to each other like ‘G-mu-nu. G-mu-nu.”’

His face lit up. “Ah, yes,” he said. “You mean Chapel Hill!”

Feynman chose as a title the odd phrase uttered by Mrs. Eisenhart at his
first Princeton tea when he asked for both cream and lemon: “Surely you’re
joking, Mr. Feynman!” Those words had stayed in his mind for forty years,
a reminder of how people used manners and culture to make him feel

small, and now he was taking revenge. W. W. Norton and Company bought
the manuscript for an advance payment of fifteen hundred dollars, a tiny
sum for a trade book. Its staff did not like Feynman’s title at all. They
proposed I Have to Understand the World or I Got an Idea (“a nice
Brooklyn ring and a little double meaning,” the editor said). But Feynman
would not budge. Norton released Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! in
a small first printing early in 1985. It sold out quickly, and within weeks the
publisher had a surprising best-seller.

One unhappy reader was Murray Gell-Mann. His attention focused on
Feynman’s description of the joy of discovering the “new law” of weak
interactions in 1957: “It was the first time, and the only time, in my career
that I knew a law of nature that nobody else knew.” Gell-Mann’s rage could
be heard through the halls of Lauritsen Laboratory, and he told other
physicists that he was going to sue. For late editions of the paperback
Feynman added a parenthetical disclaimer: “Of course it wasn’t true, but
finding out later that at least Murray Gell-Mann—and also Sudarshan and
Marshak—had worked out the same theory didn’t spoil my fun.”

Surely You’re Joking gave offense in another way. Feynman spoke of
women as he always had—“a nifty blonde, perfectly proportioned”; “a
cornfed, rather fattish-looking woman.” They appeared as objects of
flirtation, nude models for his drawings, or “bar girls” to be tricked into
sleeping with him. He knew that his diction was not wholly innocent. Sexual
politics had caught up with him before, at the 1972 meeting of the
American Physical Society in San Francisco, where he accepted the
Oersted Medal for contributions to the teaching of physics. His personal
relationships were not the issue, although in the male world of Caltech a
part of his glamorous reputation with envious students came from his
apparent sway over women. He continued to flirt with young women at
parties and encouraged Don Juan–style rumors. He frequented one of the
first California topless bars, Gianonni’s—he filled its scalloped paper
placemats with chains of equations—and amused the local press by
testifying in court on its behalf in 1968. There was genuine machismo in
the hero-worship of the male graduate students.

He had received a letter the previous fall suggesting that some of his
language tended to “reinforce many ‘sexist’ or ‘male-chauvinist’ ideas.” For
example, he told an anecdote about a scientist who was “out with his girl

friend the night after he realized that nuclear reactions must be going on in
the stars.”

She said “Look at how pretty the stars shine!” He said “Yes, and

right now I am the only man in the world who knows why they shine.”

The letter writer, E. V. Rothstein, cited another anecdote about a “lady
driver” and asked him, please, not to contribute to discrimination against
women in science. In replying, Feynman decided not to emphasize his
sensitivity:

Dear Rothstein:
 Don’t bug me, man!
 R. P. Feynman.

The result was a demonstration organized by a Berkeley group at the APS
meeting, with women carrying signs and distributing leaflets titled “PR ?
TEST” and addressed to “Richard P. (for Pig?) Feynman.”

Despite the women’s movement that emerged in the sixties, science
remained forbiddingly male in its rhetoric and its demographics. Barely 2
percent of American graduate degrees in physics went to women. Caltech
did not hire its first female faculty member until 1969, and she did not
receive tenure until she forced the issue in court in 1976. (Feynman, to the
surprise and displeasure of some of his humanities colleagues, had taken
her side; he had spent many pleasant hours in her office reading aloud
such poems as Theodore Roethke’s “I Knew a Woman”: “I measure time
by how a body sways… .”) Like most men in physics, Feynman had known
a few women as professional colleagues and believed that he had treated
them, individually, as equals. They tended to agree. What more, he
wondered, could anyone ask?

The Berkeley protesters had discovered his lady-driver anecdotes but
had overlooked other examples of a style of speaking in which, habitually,
the scientist is male and nature—her secrets waiting to be penetrated—is
female. In his Nobel lecture Feynman had recalled falling in love with his
theory: “And, like falling in love with a woman, it is only possible if you do
not know much about her, so you cannot see her faults.” And he had
concluded:

So what happened to the old theory that I fell in love with as a
youth? Well, I would say it’s become an old lady, that has very little
attractive left in her and the young today will not have their hearts
pound when they look at her anymore. But, we can say the best we
can for any old woman, that she has been a good mother and she has
given birth to some very good children.

In 1965 a large audience of men and women could listen to these words
without taking offense or hearing a politically charged subtext. In 1972
Feynman was able to defuse the protest easily when he took the podium,
by declaring: “There is in the world of physics today a tremendous
prejudice against women. This is a ridiculous thing and should stop, as
there is no sense to it whatsoever. I love the subject of physics and it has
always been my desire to try to share the delights of understanding it with
any minds that were able to—male or female… .” Many of the
demonstrators applauded. In 1985 Feynman once again seemed to some
feminists a symbol of male dominance in physics. Real life was complex:
one tough-minded Caltech professional would close her door and confide
to a stranger that Feynman, even in his sixties, was the sexiest man she
had ever known; others, wives of colleagues, resented their husbands for
loving him so uncritically. Meanwhile, the status of women in the profession
of physics had barely changed.

Despite himself, he was stung by the occasional criticism of Surely
You’re Joking. He knew, too, that some of the physicists who had known
him longest were disappointed by a self-portrait that made Feynman seem
more joker than scientist. His old friends in Hans Bethe’s generation were
often pained, or shocked, though they did repeat Feynman’s stories about
them with relish, detail for detail, as though from their own memory,
Feynman’s voice having transplanted itself into their brains. Others saw
through to the essence of what they loved in Feynman. Philip Morrison,
writing in Scientific American, said: “Generally Mr. Feynman is not joking;
it is we, the setters of ritual performance, of hypocritical standards,
pretenders to care and understanding, who are joking instead. This is the
book of a powerful mind honest beyond everything else, a specialist in
spade-naming.” Feynman nonetheless upbraided people who called the

book his autobiography. He wrote in the margin of a science writer’s draft
manuscript about modern particle physics: “Not An Autobiography. Not So.
Simply A Set Of Anecdotes.” And when he came across a sentence
describing him, at Los Alamos, as “a curiously tragic joker,” he scrawled
angrily, “What I really was under such circumstances is far deeper than you
are likely to understand.”

A Disaster of Technology

In 1958, a hasty four months after Sputnik, Americans entered what was
called the space race by sending into orbit the first of a series of Explorer
satellites from Cape Canaveral, Florida. Explorer I weighed as much as a
fully packed overnight bag. It was hurled skyward on January 31 by a fourstage Jupiter-C rocket—more reliable than the navy’s Vanguard rockets,
which had been exploding at liftoff. It sent back radio signals much like
Sputnik’s.

Explorer II, bearing a cosmic-ray detector that pushed its weight up to
thirty-two pounds, soared skyward five weeks later and disappeared into
the clouds. An army team watched under the guidance of Wernher von
Braun, resilient veteran of the Nazi rocket program at Peenemünde. They
listened to the fading rumble of the rocket and the rising beep of the radio
signal transmitted to their squawk box. All seemed well. A half hour after
the launch, they held a confident news briefing.

Across the continent, where the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena
served as the army’s main collaborator in rocket research, a team was
struggling with the task of tracking the satellite’s course. They used a
room-size IBM 704 digital computer. It was temperamental. They entered
the primitively sparse data available for tracking the metal can that the
army’s rocket had hurled forward: the frequency of the radio signal,
changing Doppler-fashion as the velocity in the line of flight changed; the
time of disappearance 
the observers at Cape Canaveral;
observations from other tracking stations. The JPL team had learned that
small variations in the computer’s input caused enormous variations in its
output. Albert Hibbs, 
laboratory’s young research chief, had
complained about this difficulty to his former Caltech thesis adviser:

from 

the 

Feynman.

Feynman bet that he could outcompute the computer, if fed the same
data at the same rate. So when Explorer II lifted off the pad at 1:28 P.M.,
he sat in a JPL conference room, surrounded by staff members rapidly
sorting the data for the computer. At one point Caltech’s president, Lee
DuBridge, entered the room and was startled to see Feynman—who
snapped, Go away, I’m busy. After a half hour Feynman rose to say he was
finished: according to his calculations the rocket had plunged into the
Atlantic Ocean. He left for a weekend in Las Vegas as the trackers kept
trying to coax an unambiguous answer from their computer. Tracking
stations at Antigua and Inyokern, California, persuaded themselves that
they had picked an orbiting satellite out of the background noise, and
“moonwatch” teams in Florida spent the night watching the skies. But
Feynman was right. The army finally announced at 5 o’clock the next
afternoon that Explorer II had failed to reach orbit.

The space shuttle Challenger rose from its launching scaffold into a
cloudless sky twenty-eight years later, on January 28, 1986. A half second
after liftoff, a puff of dark smoke, invisible to human eyes, spurted from the
side of one of the shuttle’s two solid-fuel rockets. The launch had been
postponed four times. Inside the cabin, as always, the many-gravity
acceleration pressed the crew against their seats: the commander,
Francis Scobee; the pilot, Michael Smith; the mission specialists, Ellison
Onizuka, Judith Resnick, and Ronald McNair; an engineer from the Hughes
Aircraft Company, Gregory Jarvis; and a New England schoolteacher,
Christa McAuliffe, who had been chosen as “Teacher in Space,” the winner
of a NASA public-relations program meant to encourage the interest of
children and also congressmen. The cargo bay—large enough to have
carried the 1950s Jupiter-C rocket—held a pair of satellites, a fluiddynamics experiment, and radiation-monitoring equipment. Ice had built up
overnight, and new delays had been ordered while an ice inspection team
made sure it had time to melt. Seven seconds after liftoff the shuttle rolled
over in its characteristic fashion, so that it appeared to be hanging from the
back of its giant disposable fuel tank, and headed east over the Atlantic,
its percussive roar audible over hundreds of square miles. The breeze
barely bent its column of smoke. At the one-minute mark—halfway through

the brief expected lifetime of the solid-fuel rockets—a flickering light
appeared where it did not belong, at a joint in the shell of the right-side
rocket. The main engines reached full power, and Scobee radioed,
“Roger. Go at throttle up.” At seventy-two seconds the two rockets began
to pull in different directions. At seventy-three seconds the fuel tank burst
open and released liquid hydrogen into the air, where it exploded. The
shuttle felt an enormous sudden thrust. A cloud of flame and smoke
enveloped it. Fragments emerged seconds later: the left wing, like a
triangular sail against the sky; the engines, still firing; and somewhere,
intact, a plummeting coffin for six men and a woman. The technologies of
television, aided by satellites lofted in earlier shuttle missions, let more
people witness the event, again and again, than any other disaster in
history.

Machinery out of control. The American space agency had made itself
seem a symbol of technical prowess, placing teams of men on the moon
and then fostering the illusion that space travel was routine—an illusion
built into the very name shuttle. After the nuclear accident at Three Mile
Island, Pennsylvania, and the chemical disaster at Bhopal, India, the
space-shuttle explosion seemed a final confirmation that technology had
broken free of human reins. Did nothing work any more? The dream of
technology that held sway over the America of Feynman’s childhood had
given way to a sense of technology as not just a villain but an inept villain.
Nuclear power plants, once offering the innocent promise of inexhaustible
power, had become menacing symbols on the landscape. Automobiles,
computers, simple household appliances, or giant industrial machines—all
seemed unpredictable, dangerous, untrustworthy. The society of
engineers, so hopeful in the America of Feynman’s childhood, had given
way to a technocracy, bloated and overconfident, collapsing under the
weight of its own byzantine devices. That was one message read in the
image replayed hundreds of times that day on millions of television
screens—the fragmenting smoke cloud, the twin rockets veering apart like
Roman candles.

President Ronald Reagan immediately announced his determination to
continue the shuttle program and expressed his support for the space
agency. Following government custom, he appointed an investigatory
commission that would repeatedly be described as independent—the

White House officially declared 
it “an outside group of experts,
distinguished Americans who have no ax to grind”—although in actuality it
was composed mostly of insiders and figures chosen for their symbolic
value: its chairman, William P. Rogers, who had served as attorney
general and secretary of state in Republican, administrations; Major
General Donald J. Kutyna, who had headed shuttle operations for the
Department of Defense; several NASA consultants and executives of
aerospace contractors; Sally Ride, the first American woman in space;
Neil Armstrong, the first man on the moon; Chuck Yeager, a famous former
test pilot; and, a last-minute choice, Richard Feynman, a professor who
brought to the next day’s newspaper accounts the tag “Nobel Prize winner.”
Armstrong said on the day of his appointment that he did not understand
why an independent commission was necessary. Rogers said even more
baldly, “We are not going to conduct this investigation in a manner which
would be unfairly critical of NASA, because we think—I certainly think—
NASA has done an excellent job, and I think the American people do.”

from a 

list provided by 

The White House named Rogers and selected the rest of the
commission 
the space agency’s acting
administrator, William R. Graham. As it happened, Graham had attended
Caltech thirty years before and had often sat in on Physics X, which he
remembered as the best course at Caltech. Later he had attended
Feynman’s lectures at Hughes Aircraft. But he did not think of Feynman for
the shuttle commission until his wife, who had accompanied him to some
of the Hughes lectures, suggested the name. When Graham called,
Feynman said, “You’re ruining my life.” Only later did Graham realize what
he had meant: You’re using up my very short time. Feynman was now
suffering 
form of cancer: Waldenström’s
macroglobulinemia, involving the bone marrow. In this cancer, one form of
B lymphocyte, a white blood cell, becomes abnormal and produces large
amounts of a protein that makes the blood sticky and thick. Clotting
becomes a danger, and the blood flows poorly to some parts of the body.
Feynman’s past kidney damage was a complication. He seemed gray and
wan. There was little his doctors could propose. They could not explain the
presence of two such unusual cancers. Feynman himself refused to
consider the speculation that the cause might lie forty years in the past, at
the atomic bomb project.

from a second 

rare 

He immediately arranged a briefing with his friends at the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory in Pasadena. The day after his appointment was announced,
he sat in a small room in the central engineering building and met with a
succession of engineers. The laboratory, with its advanced imageprocessing facilities, already had the original negatives of the thousands of
photographs taken by the range cameras as the shuttle drove skyward.

The shuttle’s solid rocket boosters were made in sections, assembled one atop
another at the launch site. The joints holding the sections together had to be sealed to
prevent the escape of hot gasesfrom inside the rocket. Pairs of O-rings-a quarter-inch
thickspanned the 37-foot circumference. The pressure of the gas was supposed to
wedge them tightly into the joints, creating the seal.

Feynman examined technical drawings and heard from engineers who had
worked on the early design studies, on the solid rocket boosters, and on
the engines. He learned that the shuttle’s engineers, forming a community
across the administrative boundaries that separated NASA’s various
departments and subcontractors, shared a knowledge that every launch
was at risk. Recurring cracks had appeared in the turbine blades of the

shuttle’s engines, at the very edge of engine technology. That first day,
February 4, Feynman noted that there were well-known problems with the
rubber O-rings that sealed the joints between sections of the tall solid-fuel
rockets. These rings represented a remarkable scaling-up of everyday
engineering for the high-technology shuttle: they were ordinary rubber
rings, thinner than a pencil yet thirty-seven feet long, the circumference of
the rocket. They were meant to take the pressure of hot gas and form a
seal by squeezing tight into the metal joint. “O-Rings show scorching in
Clevis check …” Feynman wrote in a shaky, aging hand. “Once a small
hole burn thru generates a large hole very fast! few seconds catastrophic
failure.” He flew to Washington that night.

The commission began in a formal and slow-paced style. Rogers
opened the first public meeting with a declaration that NASA officials had
been cooperative and that the commission would rely largely on the
agency’s own investigations. The meeting began with a briefing by
NASA’s top spaceflight official, Jesse Moore. Unexpectedly he found
himself interrupted by sharp specific questions from Feynman and several
other panel members. They focused on the weather, which had been so
cold that ice formed on equipment throughout the launching pad. In
response, Moore denied that he had had any warning that cold could pose
a problem.

That afternoon, however, another agency official, Judson A. Lovingood,
from the Marshall Space Flight Center in Alabama, testified that managers
for NASA and for Morton Thiokol, the builder of the solid rockets, had held
a telephone conference the night before the launch to discuss, as he said,
“a concern by Thiokol on low temperatures.” The discussion focused on the
O-rings, he said, and Thiokol recommended that the launch proceed. He
also mentioned evidence of “blow-by”—soot showing that hot gases had
burned 
them. He
that were supposed 
emphasized, though, that the O-rings were used in pairs and that the
secondary O-rings always seemed to hold. “Was that any cause for
concern?” asked General Kutyna.

through seals 

to contain 

“Oh, yes,” Lovingood replied. “That is an anomaly.”
Newspaper reports the next day, February 7, focused on the issue of
cold weather and noted that NASA had been caught off guard by the
aggressive questions. When Moore faced the commission again,

Feynman immediately began a new series of questions. The chairman
twice asked him to put off the questions until later. But the questioning
quickly returned to the seals. Another NASA witness testified that the films
showed a puff of dark smoke emerging from the side of the right-hand
solid rocket six-tenths of a second after ignition. “This is what we would
have called an anomaly?” Feynman asked. The witness, Arnold Aldrich,
replied carefully, “It is an anomaly unless we find a film where we have
seen one just like it.” Pressed by another commissioner, he said:

“Everything that I know about the certification of this seal … is that the
certification tests run on that joint show that the seal would be somewhat
more stiff, but completely adequate for sealing at all temperatures in the
ranges. There was never any intention that the system couldn’t be launched
in freezing conditions.”

The chairman commented protectively to Aldrich, “When we ask
questions, when we continue to ask questions, we are not really trying to
point a finger,” and to Moore, “I thought it was a little unfortunate in the
paper this morning that they said that—and I don’t think you really said that
—that you had excluded the possibility that the weather had any effect… . If
it appears you have excluded that to begin with, particularly because
apparently Rockwell did call and gave you a warning which you considered
and decided that it was okay to go ahead—suppose that judgment was
wrong. Nobody is going to blame anybody. I mean, somebody has to make
those decisions.”

But Feynman immediately challenged Moore on the view that O-ring

blow-by had been acceptable because the secondary rings had held.

“You said we don’t expect it on the other O-ring,” Feynman said. “On the
other hand, you didn’t expect it on the first O-ring… . If the second O-ring
gives just a little bit when the first one is giving, that is a very much more
serious circumstance, because now the flow has begun.” The air force
general, Kutyna, had befriended Feynman when they sat together at the
commission’s first news conference. (“Co-pilot to pilot,” he had said softly,
choosing this deferential phrase out of worry that Feynman was nervous
beside a general in an imposing uniform, “comb your hair,” and Feynman,
surprised, growled and asked Kutyna for a comb.) Now Kutyna joined in:
“Let me add to your comment… . Once it got a path, then it burns like an
acetylene torch.”

Feynman said, “I have a picture of that seal in cross section here, if

anybody wants to see it.” No one responded.

For Feynman, for Rogers, for Graham, for the press, and for NASA
officials, the weekend of February 8 brought surprises.

Feynman, away from home, thinking of his Los Alamos experience as
the prototype for urgent group technical projects, did not want to take
Saturday and Sunday off. Through Graham he arranged a series of private
briefings on Saturday at NASA’s Washington headquarters. He learned
more about the engines, the orbiter, and the seals. He found again that the
agency’s engineers understood a long history of difficulties with the Orings; that two- or three-inch segments of the thirty-seven-foot links had
repeatedly been burned and eroded; that a critical issue was the speed
with which the rubber had to press into the metal gap—in milliseconds; and
that the space agency had found a bureaucratic means of simultaneously
understanding and ignoring the problem. He was particularly struck by a
summary of a meeting between Thiokol and NASA managers the previous
August. Its recommendations seemed incompatible:

• The lack of a good secondary seal in the field joint is most critical
and ways to reduce joint rotation should be incorporated as soon as
possible to reduce criticality… .

• Analysis of existing data indicates that it is safe to continue flying… .

Elsewhere at NASA headquarters that day, Graham learned that a storm
was about to break: the New York Times had obtained documents
showing urgent warnings within NASA about O-ring problems over a
period of at least four years. Graham had taken control of the agency only
recently, when the administrator, James Beggs, was indicted on fraud
charges unrelated to NASA. He immediately telephoned Rogers.

The article appeared Sunday, quoting warnings even more dire than
those the engineers had shown Feynman: that a failure of the seals could
cause “loss of vehicle, mission, and crew due to metal erosion, burnthrough, and probable case bursting resulting in fire and deflagration,” and
that

There is little question … that flight safety has been and is being

compromised by potential failure of the seals, and it is acknowledged
that failure during launch would certainly be catastrophic.

That morning Graham himself 
the Smithsonian
Institution’s National Air and Space Museum, where he sat in a cavernous
theater and watched an inspirational giant-screen film about the space
shuttle. He was surprised at how emotional he felt.

took Feynman 

to 

In the afternoon Kutyna called Feynman at his hotel. As shuttle program
manager for the military, Kutyna knew the shuttle more intimately than any
other commissioner. He also knew how to run a technical commission,
because he had headed the air force’s own investigation into the explosion
of a Titan rocket the year before. And he had his own information sources
among the engineers and astronauts—one of whom told him over the
weekend that Thiokol had known of a potential loss of resiliency when the
rubber O-rings were cold. Kutyna wanted to bring this information into the
open without jeopardizing his source. He invited Feynman to his house for
Sunday dinner. Afterward they went out to his garage—he collected junk
cars as a hobby, and at the moment he was working on an old Opel GT. Its
carburetor happened to be sitting on his workbench. He told Feynman, you
know, those things leak when it’s cold, so do you think cold might have a
similar effect on the shuttle O-rings?

Rogers called a closed meeting Monday in reaction to the New York
Times revelations. He made clear that he considered them a disruption of
his proceedings: “I think it goes without saying that the article in the New
York Times and other articles have created an unpleasant, unfortunate
situation. There is no point in dwelling on the past.” NASA representatives
were asked to respond: “I think that his statement in here where he says
that it might be catastrophic I think is overstated,” said one, and Rogers
remarked, “Well, that may be.” Lawrence Mulloy, project manager for the
solid rockets testified that the rubber in the O-rings was required to
operate across an enormous temperature range, from minus 30 to 500
degrees Fahrenheit. He did not know of any test results, however, on the
actual resiliency of the O-rings at low temperatures.

Mulloy returned the next morning to give the commissioners a briefing—
another in the genre that Kutyna thought of as “telling which was the pointy
end of the shuttle because they don’t know that much about it.” He brought

more than a dozen charts and diagrams and gave a vivid flavor of the
engineering jargon—the tang end up and the clevis end down, the grit
blast, the splashdown loads and cavity collapse loads, the Randolph type
two zinc chromate asbestos-filled putty laid up in strips—all forbidding to
the listening reporters if not to the commissioners themselves. “How are
these materials, this putty and the rubber, affected by extremes of
temperature? …” one commissioner asked.

Yes, sir, there is a change in the characteristic. As elastomers get

colder, the resiliency decreases, and the ability to respond——

 Now, the elastomers are what?
That is the Viton O-ring.
 The rubber?

Feynman pressed Mulloy on why resiliency was crucial: a soft metal like
lead, squeezed into the gap, would not be able to hold a seal amid the
vibration and changing pressure. “If this material weren’t resilient for say a
second or two,” Feynman said, “that would be enough to be a very
dangerous situation?”

He was setting Mulloy up. He had been frustrated by the inconclusive
and possibly evasive testimony. He had made an official request for test
data, through Graham, and had received documents that were irrelevant,
showing how the rubber responded over a period of hours instead of
milliseconds. Why couldn’t the agency answer such a simple question? At
dinner Monday night his eyes fell on a glass of ice water, and he had an
idea that he first thought might be too easy and gauche. Ice water was a
stable 32 degrees, almost exactly the temperature on the pad at the time
of the launch. Tuesday morning he rose early and hailed a taxicab. He
circled official Washington in search of a hardware store and finally
managed to buy a small C-clamp and pliers. As the hearing began, he
called for ice water, and an aide returned with cups and a pitcher for the
entire commission. As a life-size cross section of the joint was passed
along for the commissioners to examine, Kutyna saw Feynman take the
clamp and pliers from his pocket and pull a piece of the O-ring rubber from
the model. He knew what Feynman meant to do. When Feynman reached
for the red button on his microphone, Kutyna held him back—the television

cameras were focused elsewhere. Rogers called a short break and, in the
men’s room, standing next to Neil Armstrong, he was overheard saying,
“Feynman is becoming a real pain in the ass.” When the hearing resumed,
the moment finally arrived.

CHAIRMAN ROGERS: Dr. Feynman has one or two comments he

would like to make. Dr. Feynman.

DR. FEYNMAN: This is a comment for Mr. Mulloy. I took this stuff that
I got out of your seal and I put it in ice water, and I discovered that
when you put some pressure on it for a while and then undo it it
doesn’t stretch back. It stays the same dimension. In other words, for a
few seconds at least and more seconds than that, there is no
resilience in this particular material when it is at a temperature of 32
degrees.

I believe that has some significance for our problem.

Before Mulloy could speak, Rogers called the next witness, a budget
analyst who had written a memorandum that formed the basis of the Times
article. The analyst, Richard Cook, had noticed the O-ring problem on a list
of “budget threats” month after month, had highlighted it to his superiors,
and, when the disaster took place, felt certain that it had been the cause.
The chairman, for the first and last time during the shuttle hearings, crossexamined a witness, through the rest of the morning and on into the
afternoon, with the cold savagery of a prosecutor:

You didn’t, I assume, make any attempt to weigh budgetary

considerations and safety considerations, did you?

Not at all.
You weren’t qualified for that?
No, sir… .
You had no reason to think that people who were weighing those
considerations were not qualified to do it? … You didn’t feel that you
were in a position or should you make those decisions about what
should be done with the space program?

That’s right.
And so that the memo, which has been given a great deal of

attention, sort of suggests that you were taking issue with the people
who were highly qualified to make those judgments, when in fact you
weren’t at all? … You wrote the memo in the heat of the moment, and I
assume you were, like everybody else in the country was, terribly
disturbed and upset by the accident, and it was in that spirit or at that
time when you wrote the memorandum. You didn’t really mean to
criticize for public consumption your associates or people around you,
did you?

Yet by then it was clear that Cook had described the problems
accurately. Feynman’s demonstration dominated the television and
newspaper reports that evening and the next morning. Mulloy, under further
questioning, made the first clear acknowledgment that cold diminished the
effectiveness of the seals and that the space agency had known it,
although a straightforward test in the manner of Feynman’s had never been
performed. When such tests were finally performed on behalf of the
commission, in April, they showed that failure of the cold seals had been
virtually inevitable—not a freakish event, but a consequence of the plain
physics of materials, as straightforward as Feynman had made it seem
with his demonstration. Freeman Dyson said later, “The public saw with
their own eyes how science is done, how a great scientist thinks with his
hands, how nature gives a clear answer when a scientist asks her a clear
question.”

One extraordinary week had passed since Feynman boarded the night
flight to Washington. The commission had four months of work remaining,
but it had arrived at the physical cause of the disaster.

As the seventies began and the last of the moon landings drew near,
NASA had become an agency lacking a clear mission but maintaining a
large established bureaucracy and a net of interconnections with the
nation’s largest aerospace companies: Lockheed, Grumman, Rockwell
International, Martin Marietta, Morton Thiokol, and hundreds of smaller
companies. All became contractors for the space-shuttle program, formally
known as the Space Transportation System, initially intended as a fleet of
reusable and economical cargo carriers that would replace the individual

one-use rockets of the past.

Within a decade, the shuttle had become a symbol of technology
defeated by its own complexity, and the shuttle program had become a
symbol of government mismanagement. Every major component had been
repeatedly redesigned and rebuilt; every cost estimate offered to
Congress had been exceeded many times over. Unpublicized audits had
found deception and spending abuses costing many billions of dollars. The
shuttle had achieved a kind of Pyrrhic reusability: the cost of refurbishing it
after each flight far exceeded the cost of standard rockets. The shuttle
could barely reach a low orbit; high orbits were out of the question. The
missions flown were a small fraction of those planned, and—despite
NASA’s public claims to the contrary—the scientific and technological
products of the shuttle were negligible. The space agency systematically
misled Congress and the public about the costs and benefits. As Feynman
stated, the agency, as a matter of bureaucratic self-preservation, found it
necessary “to exaggerate: to exaggerate how economical the shuttle would
be, to exaggerate how often it could fly, to exaggerate how safe it would
be, to exaggerate the big scientific facts that would be discovered.” At the
time of the Challenger disaster the program was breaking down internally:
by the end of the year both a shortage of spare parts and an overloaded
crew-training program would have brought the flight schedule to a halt.

Yet the report of the presidential commission, issued on June 6, began
by declaring that the accident had interrupted “one of the most productive
engineering, scientific, and exploratory programs in history.” It attributed to
the public “a determination … to strengthen the Space Shuttle program.”

When Feynman talked about his role later, he fell back on his boy-fromthe-country image of himself: “It was a great big world of mystery to me,
with tremendous forces… . I hadda watch out.” He claimed no
understanding of politics or bureaucracies. These were matters beyond
the ken of a technical fellow. Alone among the commissioners, however,
Feynman worked to expand the scope of the investigation to include
precisely the areas about which he disavowed competence: issues of
decision making, communication, and risk assessment within the space
agency. Kutyna told him he was the only commissioner free of political
entanglements. Despite Rogers’s disapproval he insisted on conducting
his own lines of inquiry and traveled alone to interview engineers at the

Kennedy Space Center in Florida, the Marshall Space Flight Center in
Alabama, the Johnson Space Center in Houston, and the headquarters of
several contractors. In between, he made repeated visits to a Washington
hospital for blood tests and medication for his worsening kidney, and he
talked by telephone with his doctor in California, who complained about the
difficulty of practicing medicine at long distance. “I am determined to do
the job of finding out what happened—let the chips fall!” he wrote Gweneth
proudly. He enjoyed the thrill of the game, and he suspected that he was
being carefully managed. “But it won’t work because (1) I do technical
information exchange and understanding much faster than they imagine”—
he was, after all, a veteran of Los Alamos and the MIT machine shop
—“and (2) I already smell certain rats that I will not forget.”

He tried to make use of his naïveté. When Rogers showed him a draft

final recommendation, effusive in its praise of the space agency—

The Commission strongly recommends that NASA continue to
receive the support of the Administration and the nation. The agency
constitutes a national resource and plays a critical role in space
exploration and development. It also provides a symbol of national
pride and technological leadership. The Commission applauds
NASA’s spectacular achievements of the past and anticipates
impressive achievements to come… .

—he balked, saying he lacked expertise about such policy matters, and he
threatened to withdraw his signature from the report.

His protest was ineffective. The language appeared virtually intact, as
the commission’s “concluding thought” rather than a recommendation.
Although the commission learned that the decision to launch had been
made over the specific objections of engineers who knew of the critical
danger from the O-rings, the final report did not attempt to hold senior
space-agency officials responsible for the decision. Evidence emerged
showing that the history of O-ring problems had been reported in detail to
top officials, including the administrator, Beggs, in August 1985, but the
commission chose not to question those officials. Feynman’s own findings,
substantially harsher than the commission’s, were isolated in an appendix
to the final report.

Feynman analyzed the computer system: 250,000 lines of code running
on obsolete hardware. He also studied in detail the main engine of the
shuttle and found serious defects, including a pattern of cracks in crucial
turbine blades, that paralleled the problems with the solid rocket boosters.
Overall he estimated that the engines and their parts were operating for
less than one-tenth of their expected lifetimes. And he documented a
history of ad hoc slippage in the standards used to certify an engine as
safe: as cracks were found earlier and earlier in a turbine’s lifetime, the
certification rules were repeatedly adjusted to allow engines to continue
flying.

His most important contribution to the understanding of the disaster
came in the area of risk and probability. He showed that the space agency
and its contractors—although the essence of their decision making lay in
weighing uncertainties—had ignored statistical science altogether and had
used a shockingly vague style of risk assessment. The commission’s
official findings could do no better than quote Feynman’s comment during
the hearings that the decision making became

a kind of Russian roulette… . [The shuttle] flies [with O-ring
erosion] and nothing happens. Then it is suggested, therefore, that the
risk is no longer so high for the next flights. We can lower our
standards a little bit because we got away with it last time… . You got
away with it, but it shouldn’t be done over and over again like that.

Science has tools for such problems. NASA was not using them. A
scattering of data points—for the depth of erosion in O-rings, for example
—tended to be reduced to simplistic, linear rules of thumb. Yet the physical
phenomenon, a hot jet of gas carving channels in rubber, was highly
nonlinear, as Feynman noted. The way to assess a scattered range of data
was through probability distributions, not single numbers. “It has to be
understood as a probabilistic and confusing, complicated situation,” he
said. “It is a question of increasing and decreasing probabilities … rather
than did it work or didn’t it work.”

On the crucial question of the effect of temperature on O-ring safety,
NASA had made an obvious statistical blunder. Seven flights had shown

evidence of damage. The most damage had occurred on the coldest flight
—at a still-mild 53 degrees Fahrenheit—but no general correlation could
be seen between temperature and damage. Serious damage had
occurred at 75 degrees, for example.

The error was to ignore the flights on which no damage had occurred, on
the basis that they were irrelevant. When these were plotted—seventeen
flights at temperatures from 66 to 81 degrees—the effect of temperature
suddenly stood out plainly. Damage was strongly associated with cold. It
was as if, to weigh the proposition that California cities tend to be in the
westernmost United States, someone made a map of California—omitting
the non-California cities that would make the tendency apparent. A team of
statisticians formed by the National Research Council to follow up the
commission report analyzed the same data and estimated a “gambling
probability” of 14 percent for a catastrophic O-ring failure at a temperature
of 31 degrees.

Feynman discovered that some engineers had a relatively realistic view
of the probabilities involved—guessing that a disaster might occur on one
flight in two hundred, for example. Yet managers had adopted fantastic
estimates on the order of one in a hundred thousand. They were fooling
themselves, he said. They cobbled together such numbers by multiplying
absurd guesses—that the chance of a turbine pipe bursting was one in ten
million, for example.

He concluded his personal report by saying, “For a successful
technology, reality must take precedence over public relations, for nature
cannot be fooled.” He joined his fellow commissioners for a ceremony at
the White House Rose Garden. Then he returned home, as he now knew,
to die.

EPILOGUE

God forbid that we should give out a dream of our own

imagination for a pattern of the world.

— Francis Bacon

Nothing is certain. Werner Heisenberg wrote this message in the twentieth
century’s consciousness. The mathematician Kurt Gödel followed with a
famous proof that no logical system can ever be consistent and complete.
The possibilities of true knowledge seemed to fade.

Heisenberg formulated his uncertainty principle narrowly: A particle
cannot have both a definite place and a definite momentum. Still,
philosophers took note. The implications seemed to cover a broader
territory than the atom and its interior. Yet Feynman scorned philosophers
(“rather than embarrass them, we shall just call them ‘cocktail-party
philosophers’”) who overinterpreted the laws of physics by saying, for
example,

“That all is relative is a consequence of Einstein, and it has
profound influences on our ideas.” In addition, they say, “It has been
demonstrated in physics that phenomena depend upon your frame of
reference.” We hear that a great deal, but it is difficult to find out what
it means… . After all, that things depend upon one’s point of view is so
simple an idea that it certainly cannot have been necessary to go to all
the trouble of the physical relativity theory in order to discover it.

Einstein’s relativity did not speak to human values. Those were, or were
not, relative for reasons unrelated to the physics of objects moving at nearlight speed. Borrowing metaphors from the technical sciences could be a
dangerous practice. Did the uncertainty principle impose its inevitable
fuzziness on any description of nature? Perhaps. But Feynman parted
company with many of his colleagues. They looked to quantum uncertainty
for an explanation of the many kinds of unpredictability that arise in the
the weather, or
everyday, human-scale world: unpredictability 

in 

indeterminacy in human behavior. Perhaps, some speculated, quantum
unpredictability was the microscopic loophole through which free will and
human consciousness entered the universe.

Stephen Hawking, typically, wrote: “The uncertainty principle signaled an
end to Laplace’s dream of a theory of science, a model of the universe that
would be completely deterministic… . Quantum mechanics therefore
introduces an unavoidable element of unpredictability or randomness into
science.” Feynman’s view was different. Even in the 1960s he anticipated
the understanding that would emerge in the modern study of chaotic
phenomena: that unpredictability was already a feature of the classical
world. He believed that a universe without a quantum uncertainty principle
would behave—on the scales of planetary storm systems and human
brains—just as erratically and freely as our own.

It is usually thought that this indeterminacy, that we cannot predict
the future, is a quantum-mechanical thing, and this is said to explain
the behavior of the mind, feelings of free will, etc. But if the world were
classical—if the laws of mechanics were classical—it is not quite
obvious that the mind would not feel more or less the same.

Why? Because tiny errors, tiny gaps in our knowledge, are amplified by the
interactions of complex systems until they reach large scales.

If water falls over a dam, it splashes. If we stand nearby, every now
and then a drop will land on our nose. This appears to be completely
random… . The tiniest irregularities are magnified in falling, so that we
get complete randomness… .

Speaking more precisely, given an arbitrary accuracy, no matter
how precise, one can find a time long enough that we cannot make
predictions valid for that long a time. Now the point is that this length of
time is not very large… . It turns out that in only a very, very tiny time we
lose all our information… . We can no longer predict what is going to
happen! It is therefore not fair to say that from the apparent freedom
and indeterminacy of the human mind, we should have realized that
classical “deterministic” physics could not ever hope to understand it,
and to welcome quantum mechanics as a release from a “completely
mechanistic” universe.

This discrepancy in beliefs—this subtle disagreement with the more
standard viewpoint of physicists like Hawking—was no quibble. It formed a
fulcrum on which turned, as the century neared its close, an essential
disagreement about the achievements and the future of physics.

to embrace 

Particle physicists were awed by the effectiveness of their theories. They
adopted a rhetoric of the “grand unified theory,” a concept with its own
acronym, GUT. Progress in science had long meant unification of
phenomena that previously had been treated separately: Maxwell’s
electrodynamics had begun to unify electricity and light, for example.
Steven Weinberg and Abdus Salam had unified 
the realms of
electromagnetic and weak interactions with their (inevitably so-called)
electroweak theory; however, this latter unification of such distant realms
seemed more a mathematical tour de force than a demonstration that the
two realms were two sides of one simple coin. Quantum chromodynamics
attempted 
interactions as well; however,
experimental support seemed remote. Physicists now talked as though
they could extend unification to cover everything, as though they could
conceive of a time when physics would be able to close shop, its work
complete. They could imagine—they could almost see—“the ultimate
theory of the universe”; “nothing less than a complete description of the
universe we live in”; “a complete unified theory of everything.” The inflation
of rhetoric accompanied a noticeable reversal of the physicists’ political
stature. The aura that had come with the success of the atomic bomb
project was fading. To carry out increasingly high-energy experiments,
physicists needed exponentially more-expensive machinery, and the
question of financing such projects became politically divisive among
scientists.

the strong 

In the year of Feynman’s death, a pair of experimental physicists
introduced a text with the simple declaration, “Fifty years of particle physics
research has produced an elegant and concise theory of particle
interactions at the subnuclear level.” Particle-physics outsiders could be
less generous. Elegant and concise? Why, then, did so many particle
masses and other specific numerical parameters have to be fed into the
theory, rather than read out? Why so many overlapping fields, so many
symmetries broken—it seemed—as necessary to fit the data? Quantum

numbers such as color and charm might be elegant simplifications, or they
might be last-minute rubber bands applied to joints that had threatened to
spring loose. And if theorists explained quark confinement, justifying a kind
of particle that could never stand on its own, they surely could explain
anything. Was the theory rigged—as one critic put it provocatively, “a
contrived intellectual structure, more an assembly of successful explanatory
tricks and gadgets … than a coherently expressed understanding of
experience”?Although each piece of the theory might have been tested
against experiment, the whole theory—the style of theory making—had
become resistant to disproof. It was hard to imagine phenomena that could
not be explained with a new symmetry breaking, a new quantum number,
or a few extra spatial dimensions. Perhaps the spare-parts department of
modern physics was so well stocked with ingenious devices that a
serviceable engine could now be devised to handle any data the particle
accelerators could offer.

This was a harsh critique—not Feynman’s. Still, in another time,
Feynman had spoken of the search for the fundamental laws of nature. No
longer:

People say to me, “Are you looking for the ultimate laws of
physics?” No, I’m not… . If it turns out there is a simple ultimate law
which explains everything, so be it—that would be very nice to
discover. If it turns out it’s like an onion with millions of layers … then
that’s the way it is.

He believed that his colleagues were claiming more success at unification
than they had achieved—that disparate theories had been pasted together
tenuously. When Hawking said, “We may now be near the end of the
search for the ultimate laws of nature,” many particle physicists agreed. But
Feynman did not. “I’ve had a lifetime of that,” he said on another occasion.
“I’ve had a lifetime of people who believe that the answer is just around the
corner.”

But again and again it’s been a failure. Eddington who thought that
with the theory of electrons and quantum mechanics everything was
going to be simple … Einstein, who thought that he had a unified

theory just around the corner but didn’t know anything about nuclei and
was unable of course to guess it… . People think they’re very close to
the answer, but I don’t think so… .

Whether or not nature has an ultimate, simple, unified, beautiful form

is an open question, and I don’t want to say either way.

In the 1980s a mathematically powerful and experimentally untestable
attempt at unification emerged in the form of string theory, using stringlike
entities wrapped through many dimensions as their fundamental objects.
The extra dimensions are supposed to fold themselves out of the way in a
kind of symmetry breaking given the name compactification. String theory
relies on Feynman’s sum-over-histories method as an essential underlying
principle; the theory views particle events as topological surfaces and
computes probability amplitudes by summing over all possible surfaces.
Feynman kept his distance, sometimes saying that perhaps he was too old
to appreciate the new fashion. String theory seemed too far from
experiment. He suspected that the string theorists were not trying hard
enough to prove themselves wrong. In the meantime he never adopted the
rhetoric of GUT’s. It made him uncomfortable. He retreated into the stance
that he himself merely solved problems as they came along.

When a historian of particle physics pressed him on the question of
unification in his Caltech office, he resisted. “Your career spans the period
of the construction of the standard model,” the interviewer said.

“‘The standard model,’” Feynman repeated dubiously.
“SU(1) 

× U(1). From 

× SU(2) 

renormalization 

to quantum

electrodynamics to now?”

“The standard model, standard model,” Feynman said. “The standard
model—is that the one that says that we have electrodynamics, we have
weak interaction, and we have strong interaction? Okay. Yes.”

The interviewer said, “That was quite an achievement, putting them

together.”

“They’re not put together.”
“Linked together in a single theoretical package?”
“No.”
The interviewer was having trouble getting his question onto the table.

“What do you call SU(×3)SU(2)×U(1)?”

“Three theories,” Feynman said. “Strong interactions, weak interactions,
and electromagnetic… . The theories are linked because they seem to
have similar characteristics… . Where does it go together? Only if you add
some stuff that we don’t know. There isn’t any theory today that has SU(3)
× SU(2) × U(1)—whatever the hell it is—that we know is right, that has any
experimental check… . Now, these guys are all trying to put all this
together. They’re trying to. But they haven’t. Okay?”

Particle physicists were his community. They were the elite who revered
him, who passed along his legend, who lent him so much of his prestige.
He rarely dissented publicly from their standard dogma. For the past two
decades, he had worked on their problems: try though he might to
disregard, in the end he had accepted their agenda.

“So we aren’t any closer to unification than we were in Einstein’s time?”

the historian asked.

Feynman grew angry. “It’s a crazy question! … We’re certainly closer. We
know more. And if there’s a finite amount to be known, we obviously must
be closer to having the knowledge, okay? I don’t know how to make this
into a sensible question… . It’s all so stupid. All these interviews are
always so damned useless.”

He rose from his desk and walked out the door and down the corridor,
drumming his knuckles along the wall. The writer heard him shout, just
before he disappeared: “It’s goddamned useless to talk about these
things! It’s a complete waste of time! The history of these things is
nonsense! You’re trying to make something difficult and complicated out of
something that’s simple and beautiful.”

Across the hall Murray Gell-Mann looked out of his office. “I see you’ve

met Dick,” he said.

Feynman had always set high standards for fundamental work, although
he meant something broader by the word than many particle physicists did.
Liquid helium and other solid-state problems had seemed to him as
fundamental as the smallest-scale particle interactions. He believed that
fundamentalness, like beauty or intelligence, was a multidimensional
quality. He had tried to understand turbulence and quantum gravity.
Throughout his career he had suffered painful periods of malaise, when he

field 

their own 

issues on 

their crowded 

thin: bright young students, 
turned 
terms, often 

could not find a suitable problem. In later years he and his colleagues had
seen 
for
looking 
to biology,
fundamental 
computation, or the new study of chaos and complexity. When his son,
Carl, ended his flirtation with philosophy and took up computer science,
Feynman, too, looked again at the field he had helped pioneer at Los
Alamos. He joined two Caltech authorities on computation, John Hopfield
and Carver Mead, in constructing a course on issues from brain analogues
and pattern recognition to error correction and uncomputability. For several
summers he worked with the founders of Thinking Machines Corporation,
near MIT, creating a radical approach to parallel processing; he served as
a high-class technician, applying differential equations to the circuit
diagrams, and as an occasional wise man among the young entrepreneurs
(“Forget all that ‘local minima’ stuff—just say there’s a bubble caught in the
crystal and you have to shake it out”). And he began to produce maverick
research at the intersection of computing and physics: on how small
computers could be; on entropy and the uncertainty principle in computing;
on simulating quantum physics and probabilistic behavior; and on the
possibility of building a quantum-mechanical computer, with packets of
spin waves roaming ballistically back and forth through the logic gates.

His own community had largely left behind questions with the spirit that
first drove him toward physics. An intellectual distance had opened
between the subatomic particle universe and the realm of ordinary
phenomena—the magic that nature reveals to children. In The Feynman
Lectures he spoke allegorically of the beauty of a rainbow. Imagine a world
in which scientists could not see a rainbow: they might discover it, but
could they sense its beauty? The essence of a thing does not always lie in
the microscopic details. He supposed that the blind scientists learned that,
in some weathers, the intensity of radiation plotted against wavelength at a
certain direction in the sky would show a bump, and the bump would shift
from one wavelength to another as the angle of the instrument shifted.
“Then one day,” he said, “the physical review of the blind men might publish
a technical article with the title ‘The Intensity of Radiation as a Function of
Angle under Certain Conditions of the Weather.’” Feynman had no quarrel
with beauty—our human illusion, our projection of sentiment onto a reality
of radiation phenomena.

“We are all reductionists today,” said Steven Weinberg—meaning that
we seek the deepest explanatory principles in the elementary particles that
underlie ordinary matter. He spoke for many particle physicists but not for
Feynman. Understanding the principles at the lowest level of the hierarchy
—the smallest length-scales—is not the same as understanding nature. So
much lies outside the accelerators’ domain, even if it is in some sense
reducible to elementary particles. Chaotic turbulence; the large-scale
structures that emerge in complex systems; life itself: Feynman spoke of
“the infinite variety and novelty of phenomena that can be generated from
such simple principles”—phenomena that are “in the equations; we just
haven’t found the way to get them out.”

The test of science is its ability to predict. Had you never visited
the earth, could you predict the thunderstorms, the volcanoes, the
ocean waves, the auroras, and the colorful sunset? …

The next great era of awakening of human intellect may well
produce a method of understanding the qualitative content of
equations. Today we cannot. Today we cannot see that the water-flow
equations contain such things as the barber pole structure of
turbulence that one sees between rotating cylinders. Today we cannot
see whether Schrödinger’s equation contains 
frogs, musical
composers, or morality—or whether it does not.

Physicists’ models are like maps: never final, never complete until they
grow as large and complex as the reality they represent. Einstein
compared physics to the conception a person might assemble of the
interior mechanism of a closed watch: he might build a plausible model to
account for the rhythmic ticking, the sweep of the hands, but he could never
be certain. “He may also believe in the existence of the ideal limit of
knowledge and that it is approached by the human mind,” Einstein said.
“He may call this ideal limit the objective truth.” It was a simpler time. In
Feynman’s era, knowledge advanced, but the ideal of objective truth
receded deeper into the haze beyond the vision of science. Quantum
theory had left an impossible question dangling in the air. One physicist
chose to answer it by quoting Feynman, “one of the great philosophers of
our time, whose view of the matter I have taken the liberty of quoting in the

form of the poetry it surely is”:

We have always had a great deal of difficulty

understanding the world view
that quantum mechanics represents.

At least I do,

because I’m an old enough man 
that I haven’t got to the point 
that this stuff is obvious to me.

Okay, I still get nervous with it….

You know how it always is,
every new idea,
it takes a generation or two
until it becomes obvious
that there’s no real problem….

I cannot define the real problem, 

therefore I suspect there’s no real problem, 
but I’m not sure 
there’s no real problem.

In October 1987 another abdominal tumor appeared, and his doctors
made one last attempt to stall his cancer surgically. When the Los Angeles
Times sent him an advance copy of his obituary, he thanked the author but
said, “I have decided it is not a very good idea for a man to read it ahead
of time: it takes the element of surprise out of it.” He knew he was not
recovering. He was sixty-nine years old. Pain wracked one of his legs. He
was exhausted. He had no appetite. In January he began awakening in the
night with sweats and chills. In one corner of his dusty office blackboard he
had written a pair of self-conscious mottoes: “What I cannot create I do not
understand” and “Know how to solve every problem that has been solved.”
Nearby was a running list under the heading, “TO LEARN” (“Bethe Ansatz

Prob., 2D Hall …”). Physics changed; he talked about it once with his old
Los Alamos friend Stanislaw Ulam, who had been watching a few white
clouds roll against the blue New Mexico sky. Feynman seemed to read his
mind: “It is really like the shape of clouds,” he said. “As one watches them
they don’t seem to change, but if you look back a minute later, it is all very
different.” He had not accumulated much: a hand-knitted scarf, hanging on
a peg, from some students in Yugoslavia; a photograph of Michelle with
her cello; some black-and-white pictures of the aurora borealis; his deep
leather recliner; a sketch he had made of Dirac; a van painted with
chocolate-brown Feynman diagrams. On February 3 he entered the UCLA
Medical Center again.

Doctors in the intensive care unit discovered a ruptured duodenal ulcer.
They administered antibiotics. But his remaining kidney had failed. One
round of dialysis was performed, with little effect. Feynman refused the
further dialysis that might have prolonged his life for weeks or months. He
told Michelle calmly, “I’m going to die,” in a tone that said: I have decided.
He was watched and guarded now by the three women who had loved him
longest: Gweneth, Joan, and his cousin Frances Lewine, who had lived
with him in the house in Far Rockaway. Morphine for pain and an oxygen
tube were their last concessions to medicine. The doctors said it would
take about five days. He had watched one death before—trying to be
scientific, observing the descent into coma and the sporadic breathing,
imagining the brain clouding as it was starved of oxygen. He had
anticipated his own—toying with the release of consciousness in dark
sensory-deprivation tanks, telling a friend that he had now taught people
most of the good stuff he knew, and making his peace with bottomless
nature:

You see, one thing is, I can live with doubt and uncertainty and not
knowing. I think it’s much more interesting to live not knowing than to
have answers which might be wrong. I have approximate answers and
possible beliefs and different degrees of certainty about different
things, but I’m not absolutely sure of anything and there are many
things I don’t know anything about, such as whether it means anything
to ask why we’re here… .

I don’t have to know an answer. I don’t feel frightened by not
knowing things, by being lost in a mysterious universe without any
purpose, which is the way it really is as far as I can tell. It doesn’t
frighten me.

He drifted toward unconsciousness. His eyes dimmed. Speech became
an exertion. Gweneth watched as he drew himself together, prepared a
phrase, and released it: “I’d hate to die twice. It’s so boring.” After that, he
tried to communicate by shifting his head or squeezing the hand that
clasped his. Shortly before midnight on February 15, 1988, his body
gasped for air that the oxygen tube could not provide, and his space in the
world closed. An imprint remained: what he knew; how he knew.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I never met Feynman. I’ve relied on the published (and semipublished)
record; on his own accumulation of personal letters, notes to himself, and
other documents, released to me in 1988 by Gweneth Howarth Feynman;
on letters shared by other family members and friends; on his office files
and other documents stored in the California Institute of Technology
Archives in Pasadena; on early material collected at the Niels Bohr Library
of the American Institute of Physics in New York. I obtained recently
declassified notebooks and papers from the archives of Los Alamos
libraries and
National Laboratory. Other material came 
manuscript collections of 
the American
Philosophical Society (papers of H. D. Smyth and J. A. Wheeler); the
Brooklyn Historical Society; Cornell University (papers of H. A. Bethe); Far
Rockaway High School; Harvard University; the Library of Congress
(papers of J. R. Oppenheimer); the Massachusetts Institute of Technology;
Princeton University; Rockefeller University; and the Stanford Linear
Accelerator Center.

the 
from 
institutions: 

following 

the 

The leading physicists who play the largest roles in this book agreed to
provide their own recollections in interviews that sometimes extended over
many sessions: Hans Bethe, Freeman Dyson, Murray Gell-Mann, Julian
Schwinger, Victor Weisskopf, John Archibald Wheeler, and Robert R.
Wilson.

Feynman’s own voice is everywhere in his published work, of course,
and toward the end of his life, wherever he went, tape recorders and video
cameras seemed to be running. But several interviews of Feynman by
historians and others were especially valuable. The deepest and most
comprehensive—a central resource for anyone studying Feynman—is an
oral history of many hundreds of pages conducted by Charles Weiner for
the American Institute of Physics in 1966 and 1973; I used Feynman’s
copy of the transcript, with his handwritten corrections and comments. I
also consulted the AIP’s oral-history interviews with Bethe, Dyson, William
A. Fowler, Werner Heisenberg, Philip Morrison, and others. The physicist

and historian Silvan S. Schweber kindly shared the tape of his revealing
1980 interview on the development of quantum electrodynamics and on
Feynman’s style of visualization. Lillian Hoddeson conducted a useful
interview of Feynman for her technical history of Los Alamos. Robert
Crease gave me the transcript of an interview for his and Charles Mann’s
The Second Creation. Christopher Sykes gave me access to the uncut
interview he conducted for what became the 1981 BBC-TV production,
The Pleasure of Finding Things Out. Sali Ann Kriegsman gave me her
transcript of Feynman’s recollections of Far Rockaway.

Ralph Leighton, who drew from Feynman the reminiscences that
became Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! and What Do You Care
What Other People Think?, generously provided the original tapes of
these interviews over nearly a decade. These are the stories that Feynman
retold and refined over his lifetime—mostly accurate, but strongly filtered. I
have tried not to lean on them too heavily, for reasons that I hope emerge
in the text.

Feynman’s family members also spoke with me at length: Gweneth,
Joan, Carl, and Michelle Feynman and Frances Lewine. Helen J. Tuck, his
secretary of many years, shared her invaluable memories and perceptive
comments.

Among the many other colleagues, students, friends, and observers of
Feynman who helped me by submitting to interviews or providing written
recollections—and in some cases copies of letters and diary pages—
were Jan Anbjørn, Robert Bacher, Michel Baranger, Barry Barish, Henry H.
Barschall, Mary Louise Bell, Rose Bethe, Jerry Bishop, James Bjorken,
Peter A. Carruthers, Robert F. Christy, Michael Cohen, Sidney Coleman,
Monarch L. Cutler, Predrag Cvitanović, Cecile DeWitt-Morette, Russell J.
Donnelly, Sidney Drell, Leonard Eisenbud, Timothy Ferris, Richard D.
Field, Michael E. Fisher, Evelyn Frank, Steven Frautschi, Edward Fredkin,
Sheldon Clashow, Marvin Goldberger, David Goodstein, Frances R. (Rose
McSherry) Graham, William R. Graham, Jules Greenbaum, Bruce Gregory,
W. Conyers Herring, Simeon Hutner, Albert Hibbs, Douglas R. Hofstadter,
Gerald Holton, John L. Joseph, Daniel Kevles, Sándor J. Kovács, Donald
J. Kutyna, Janijoy La Belle, Leo Lavatelli, Ralph Leighton, Charles Lifer,
Leite Lopes, Edward Maisel, Anne Tilghman Wilson Marks, Robert E.
Marshak, Leonard Mautner, Robert M. May, William H. McLellan, Carver

Mead, Nicholas Metropolis, Maurice A. Meyer, Philip Morrison, Masako
Ohnuki, Paul Olum, Abraham Pais, David Park, John Polkinghorne, Burton
Richter, John S. Rigden, Michael Riordan, Daniel Robbins, Matthew
Sands, David Sanger, J. Robert Schrieffer, Theodore Schultz, Al Seckel,
Barry Simon, Cyril Stanley Smith, Norris Parker Smith, Novera H. Spector,
Millard Susman, Kip S. Thome, Yung-Su Tsai, John Tukey, Tom van Sant,
Dorothy Walker, Robert L. Walker, Steven Weinberg, Charles Weiner,
Theodore A. Welton, Arthur S. Wightman, Jane Wilson, Stephen Wolfram,
and George Zweig.

Two indispensable histories of twentieth-century physics are Kevles,

The Physicists, and Pais, Inward Bound.

I’m especially grateful to Mitchell Feigenbaum and Silvan S. Schweber
for patient guidance and sharp insights on matters of physics. I particularly
thank Schweber for letting me read the manuscript-in-progress of his
forthcoming history of quantum electrodynamics, QED: 1946–1950: An
American Success Story. I thank Predrag Cvitanovi? for permission to
quote his fable of Quefithe. Robert Chadwell Williams, a biographer of
Klaus Fuchs, sent a helpful mass of archival material relating to the
Manhattan Project. I benefited from discussions with Joseph N. Straus and
Hugh Wolff about genius, music, and music theory.

Cheryl Colbert lent me her intelligent and resourceful assistance. Emilio
Millan shared a useful file of clippings and other documents that he had
collected.

This book owes an enormous obligation to the skills of my editor, Daniel

Frank, and my agent, Michael Carlisle.

As always, the indescribable debt is to Cynthia Crossen, who for so long
endured, among other things, that strange, persistent presence of an extra
soul in our household.

J. G.
Brooklyn, New York
8 July 1992

NOTES

ABBREVIATIONS

AIP: Niels Bohr Library, Center for the History of Physics, American

Institute of Physics.

BET: H. A. Bethe papers, Cornell University.
CIT: California Institute of Technology Archives.
CPL: The Character of Physical Law.
F-H: Interview with Lillian Hoddeson and Gordon Baym, 16 April 1979.

LANL.

F-L: Interviews with Ralph Leighton. Tapes courtesy of Leighton.
F-Sch: Interview with Silvan S. Schweber, 13 November 1988. Tape

courtesy of Schweber.

F-Sy: Interview with Christopher Sykes, recorded in preparation for The
Pleasure of Finding Things Out, BBC-TV, 1981. Tape courtesy of
Sykes.

F-W: Interviews with Charles Werner, 4 March 1966, 27–28 June 1966,

and 4 February 1973. AIP.

FOI: Feynman’s FBI files and documents from other federal agencies,

obtained through the Freedom of Information Act.

LANL: Los Alamos National Laboratory Archives.
Lectures: The Feynman Lectures on Physics.
LOC: Library of Congress.
MIT: Massachusetts Institute of Technology Libraries.
NL: 

“The Development of 

the Space-Time View of Quantum
Electrodynamics.” Nobel lecture (Feynman 1965a; cf. Feynman 1965b
and 1965c). For convenience, page numbers refer to the Weaver 1987
reprint.

OPP: J. R. Oppenheimer papers. LOC.
PERS: Personal papers obtained by the author.
PUL: Princeton University Libraries.
QED: QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter.

SMY: H. D. Smyth papers, American Philosophical Society.
SYJ: Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman!
WDY: What Do You Care What Other People Think?
WHE: J. A. Wheeler papers, American Philosophical Society.

PROLOGUE

The account of the Pocono meeting is based on interviews with several of
the participants (Hans Bethe, Robert Marshak, Abraham Pais, Julian
Schwinger, Victor Weisskopf, and John Archibald Wheeler), on Feynman’s
account in Physics Today (Feynman 1948d) and his recollections in F-W,
on Wheeler’s handwritten and mimeographed notes (Wheeler 1948), on
correspondence in the J. R. Oppenheimer papers, on historical essays by
Silvan S. Schweber (1985 and forthcoming), and on my visit to the site.
3 NOTHING IS CERTAIN: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 9 May 1945, PERS.
3 IT GNAWED AT HIM: Feynman 1975, 132.
3 WOMEN SIDLED AWAY: AIP, 423.
3 HALF GENIUS AND HALF BUFFOON: Freeman Dyson to his parents, 8 March

1948; Dyson, interview, Princeton, N.J.

4 NO TRANSCRIPT: John Archibald Wheeler made and later circulated
several dozen pages of handwritten notes, however (Wheeler 1948).

5 PRINCIPLES: “Addresses,” notebook, PERS.
6 THE MOST BRILLIANT YOUNG PHYSICIST: “He is by all odds the most brilliant
young physicist here, and everyone knows this.” Smith and Weiner
1980, 268.

6 THE KEY EQUATION: Hans Bethe, interview, Ithaca, N.Y.
6 TWISTING A CONTROL KNOB : Victor Weisskopf had brought the trains from
Russia. “He played the following game. The guy with the switches has
to avoid an accident and the other one has to produce an accident. It
was the most nervewracking game you can imagine, and Dick was
absolutely into it. It didn’t matter which role he played.” Weisskopf,
interview, Cambridge, Mass.

6 WHAT ABOUT THE EXCLUSION PRINCIPLE?: F-W, 471.
7 IS IT UNITARY?: Ibid., 472.
7 THIS WONDERFUL VISION OF THE WORLD: Dyson 1979, 62.
7 THANK GOD: W.H. Auden, “After Reading a Child’s Guide to Modern

Physics,” Selected Poetry of W. H. Auden (New York: Vintage, 1971),
214.

7 A POEM FEYNMAN DETESTED: Feynman to Mrs. Robert Weiner, 24 October
1967, CIT. Auden wrote, “This passion of our kind/For the process of
finding out/Is a fact one can hardly doubt”—and Feynman resented his
adding, “But I would rejoice in it more/If I knew more clearly what/We
wanted the knowledge for.” Feynman said: “We want it so we can love
is directly confessing not
. A modern poet 
Nature more… 
understanding the emotional value of knowledge of nature.”

9 WE PUT OUR FOOT IN A SWAMP: Albert R. Hibbs, interview, Pasadena, Calif.
9 A LITTLE BIZARRE: Snow 1981, 142–43.
10 A SHALLOW WAY TO JUDGE: Morrison 1988, 42.
10 WE GOT THE INDELIBLE IMPRESSION: David Park, personal communication.
10 DICK COULD GET AWAY WITH A LOT : Sidney Coleman, interview,

Cambridge, Mass.

10 FEYNMAN TRIED TO STAND ON HIS OWN: Kac 1985, 116.
10 THERE ARE TWO KINDS OF GENIUSES: Ibid., XXV.
11 ANGERED HIS FAMILY: E.g., Gweneth Feynman, interview, Altadena, Calif.;

Gell-Mann 1989a, 50.

11 HE’S NO FEYNMAN, BUT: Morrison 1988, 42.
12 A HALF-SERIOUS DEBATE: Coleman, interview.
12 BOOK II, CHAPTER 41, VERSE 6: D. Goodstein 1989, 75.
13 PHILOSOPHERS ARE ALWAYS ON THE OUTSIDE: CPL, 173.
13 IT HAS NOT YET BECOME OBVIOUS: Feynman 1982, 471.
13 DO NOT KEEP SAYING TO YOURSELF: CPL, 129
13 NATURE USES ONLY THE LONGEST THREADS: Ibid., 34; draft, PERS.
15 AN OFFICIAL SECRECY ORDER: U. S. Department of Commerce Rescinding

Order, 7 January 1966, CIT.

15 HE DID THE TRAINING IN STAGES: Ralph Leighton, interview, Pasadena.
1 6 A TWO-HANDED POLYRHYTHM: Theodore Schultz, interview, Yorktown

Heights, N.Y.

16 AN HONEST MAN: Schwinger 1989, 48.

FAR ROCKAWAY

Family members and childhood friends provided recollections and copies

of correspondence from the 1920s and 1930s: Joan Feynman, Frances
Lewine, Jules Greenbaum (Arline Greenbaum’s brother), Leonard
Mautner, Jerry Bishop, Mary D. Lee, and Novera H. Spector. Far
Rockaway High School and the Brooklyn Historical Society had records,
school newspapers, Chamber of Commerce publications, and other useful
documents from the period. Sali Ann Kriegsman and Charles Weiner
kindly shared transcripts of oral-history interviews they had conducted with
Lucille Feynman.
18 HE ASSEMBLED A CRYSTAL SET: F-W, 35.
18 WHEN ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS WERE RIGHT: SYJ, 5.
18 EINSTEIN WAS SHOWING: Einstein 1909.
18 IT SEEMS THAT THE AETHER: Weyl 1922, 172.
19 “THE SHADOW” and “UNCLE DON”: F-W, 35.
19 A COIL SALVAGED FROM A FORD: SYJ, 4.
1 9 STANDARD EMERGENCY PROCEDURE: Frances Lewine, 

interview,

Washington, D.C., and Far Rockaway.

19 DANGLING HIS METAL WASTEBASKET: Lucille Feynman to Feynman, 8 August

1945, PERS.

19 HIS SISTER, JOAN: Joan Feynman, interview, Pasadena.
20 RICHARD WALKED TO THE LIBRARY: Feynman, interview conducted by Sali

Ann Kriegsman, 27 October 1975.
21 WHEN I WAS A CHILD: Kazin 1951, 8–10.
21 IT SOMETIMES SEEMED THAT THE THINGS NEAR THE SEA: Feynman-Kriegsman.
21 SOMETIMES FELT GAWKY: Evelyn Frank, interview, Marina del Rey, Calif.
22 IF WE STAND ON THE SHORE: Lectures, II-2-1.
22 IS THE SAND OTHER THAN THE ROCKS?: Ibid.
22 WHEN FEYNMAN RETURNED: Gweneth Feynman, interview, Altadena;

Feynman-Kriegsman.

22 THOSE LITTLE HATS THAT THEY WEAR: Feynman-Kriegsman.
23 THAT WAS THE WAY THE WORLD WAS: Ibid.
24 LUCILLE WAS THE DAUGHTER: Lucille Feynman, interview conducted by

Charles Weiner, MIT Oral History Program, 4 February 1981.

25 DON’T GET MARRIED: Ibid.
25 DON’T COUNT YOUR CHICKENS: Ibid.
25 BEFORE THE BABY WAS OUT: F-W, 7–8.
25 HE WAS TWO BEFORE HE TALKED: Lucille Feynman-Weiner.

25 TWENTY-FIVE FEET HIGH: F-Sy.
25 HER MOTHER SUFFERED: Joan Feynman, interview.
26 WITήIN DAYS THE BABY: Ibid.
26 A BIRTH CERTIFICATE AND A HAT: Ibid.
26 SOME EVENINGS THE ADULTS: Lewine, interview.
26 THE HOUSEHOLD HAD TWO OTHER: Joan Feynman, interview conducted by
Charles Weiner, MIT Oral History Program, 30 July 1981; Lewine,
interview.

27 LOOK UP: Joan Feynman, “Relinquishing the Aurora,” letter, Eos, 1989,

1649.

27 RITT? WIRED HIS LABORATORY: F-W, 35–37.
27 IT WORKS!: Joan Feynman, interview.
27 IT WAS WORTH IT: F-W, 34.
28 SO THAT HE CAN BETTER FACE THE WORLD: Melville Feynman to Feynman,

10 September 1944, PERS.
28 WHEN A CHILD DOES SOMETHING: Ibid.
28 WHEN MELVILLE TOOK HIS SON: F-W, 14.
28 SEE THAT BIRD?: WDY, 13–14.
29 “THAT,” HE SAYS, “NOBODY KNOWS ”: F-Sy; cf. “Inertia,” notes, n.d., CIT: “Is
inertia an intrinsic fundamental force which will always defy a more
ultimate analysis? Or is inertia a force which has its origin in the
workings of other recognized forces like gravitation or electricity?”

30 IT’S A WAY OF DOING PROBLEMS: F-W, 15.
30 JOANIE, IF 2x: Joan Feynman-Weiner.
30 ALGEBRA 2, TAUGHT BY MISS MOORE: Leonard Mautner, interview. Pacific

Palisades, Calif.

30 HIS SCORE ON THE SCHOOL IQ TEST: Feynman 1965d, 15.
30 AN INTELLECTUAL DESERT: F-W, 39
30 A SET OF FOUR EQUATIONS: Ibid., 23 and 39.
30 ALL FEYNMAN REMEMBERED: Ibid., 38
31 ENERGY PLAYS AN IMPORTANT PART: “Energy,” poem, n.d., AIP.
31 SCIENCE IS MAKING US WONDER: “We Are Forgetful,” poem, n.d., AIP.
32 SISSY-LIKE: F-L; edited version in SYJ, 67.
32 THE SIGHT OF A BALL: WDY, 24.
32 ANXIETY WOULD STRIKE: Ibid., 21.
32 HIS FIRST CHEMISTRY SET: F-W, 33

32 GOODY-GOOD: Ibid., 21; Feynman 1965d, 11.
32 IN PHYSICS CLUB: The Dolphin, Far Rockaway High School, June 1935,

33.

3 3 MATH TEAM: SYJ, 10–11; Jerry Bishop, telephone interview; Novera H.

Spector, telephone interview.
34 A LOUD SIGH: Feynman 1965d, 12.
34 FEYNMAN PLACED FIRST: The Dolphin, Far Rockaway High School, June

1935, 33.

34 TWO CHILDREN IN HIGH SCHOOL: F-W, 63; Mautner, interview.
36 MR. AUGSBURY ABDICATED: Harold I. Lief to Ralph Leighton, 10

December 1988.

36 MAD GENIUS: The Dolphin, Far Rockaway High School, June 1935.
36 SOME OBSERVATIONS SUPPORTED THE NOTION: Melsen 1952, 22.
37 HOW DO SHARP THINGS STAY SHARP: F-W, 46.
37 ALL THINGS ARE MADE OF ATOMS: Lectures, I-1–2
38 BELIEVE THE EXISTENCE OF ATOMS: Bohr 1922, 315.
3 8 PURE CHEMISTRY, EVEN TO-DAY: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 13th ed.,

1926, 870.

39 MATTER IS UNCHANGEABLE: Boscovitch 1922, 36; Park 1988, 200–201.
40 THE SCIENCE KNOWN AS CHEMICAL PHYSICS: Slater 1975, 193.
40 WE HAVE BEEN FORCED TO RECOGNIZE: Bohr was creating publicity for his
philosophical 
interpretation of quantum mechanics. The press
cooperated enthusiastically, although it posed difficulties for headline
the New York Times wrote
writers. William L. Laurence of 
optimistically: “The new theory is expected … to take its place
alongside relativity and quantum mechanics as one of the revolutionary
developments of modern scientific thought…. Professor Bohr, after a
lifetime of contemplation of both 
the
imponderables of the physical and mental world, has come to discover
an inherent essential duality…. In other words the very process of
knowing one aspect of nature makes it impossible for us to know the
other aspect.” “Jekyll-Hyde Mind Attributed to Man,” New York Times,
23 June 1933, 1.

the ponderables and 

40 FOR THE OCCASION: Joan Feynman-Weiner, 28–29.
40 KNOWLEDGE IS POWER: F-W, 78.

41 NEW YORK IN 1982: Chase 1932, 13.
41 ELECTRICITY POWERED THE HUMAN BRAIN: William A. Laurence, “Brain
Phone Lines Counted as 1 Plus 15 Million Zeroes,” New York Times,
25 June 1933.

41 IN AN OPENING-DAY STUNT: Dedmon 1953, 334.
41 HERE ARE CATHERED THE EVIDENCES: “Chicago Fair Opened by Farley;

Rays of Arcturus Start Lights,” New York Times, 28 May 1933.

41 A 151 -WORD WALL MOTTO: “Science in 151 Words,” New York Times, 4

June 1933.

42 EINSTEIN’S SUPPOSED CLAIM: Cf. Kevles 1987, 175, and Pais 1982, 309.
Einstein seems not to have disavowed the remark when given the
chance.

42 LIGHTS ALL ASKEW IN THE HEAVENS: New York Times, 9 November 1919,

quoted in Pais 1982, 309.

42 A SERIES OF EDITORIALS: Pais 1982, 309.
42 MORE THAN ONE HUNDRED BOOKS: Clark 1971, 247.
42 TRANSMITTED BY UNDERWATER CABLE: Kevles 1987, 175.
42 WE HAVE EINSTEIN’S SPACE: Quoted in Clark 1971, 242.
44 THERE ARE NO PHYSICISTS IN AMERICA: Raymond T. Birge to John van

Vleck, 10 March 1927, quoted in Schweber 1986ft, 55–56.

45 I BELIEVE THAT MINNEAPOLIS: Quoted in Kevles 1987, 168.
45 ON THE BEACH SOME DAYS: Lewine, interview; Joan Feynman, interview;

Joan Feynman-Weiner.

45 SHORTLY HE FOUND HIMSELF LYING: F-W, 117.
45 ONE HORRIBLY RUDE BOY: Ibid., 118
46 ALL LEFT HIM FEELING INEPT: WDY, 20–23.
46 WITH THE COMING OF THE DEPRESSION: Joan Feynman-Weiner.
46 TO THE METROPOLITAN MUSEUM: Ibid., 31—32.
4 6 THE RADIO HAD PENETRATED: “Modernistic Radios,” New York Times, 4

June 1933.

46 HE REWIRED A PLUG: F-W, 105–7.
46 HE FIXES RADIOS BY THINKING!: SYJ, 3.
47 WHAT ARE YOU DOING?: F-W, 107–8; SYJ, 7–8.
47 MERELY TO FIND A MATHEMATICS TEXTBOOK: Feynman 1965d, 10.
47 IF A BOY NAMED MORRIE JACOBS: Feynman to Morris Jacobs, 27 January

1987, CIT.

47 HE RECOGNIZED THE PLEASURE: Feynman 1965d, 11.
48 SCHWINGER KNEW HOW TO FIND BOOKS: Schweber, forthcoming. 48 THE

PHYSICAL REVIEW: Kevles 1987, 218.

48 THAT YEAR HE CAREFULLY TYPED OUT: Julian Schwinger, interview, Bel Air,
Calif.; Schwinger 1934. He later said (1983), he had been “parrot[ing]
the wisdom of my elders, to be later rejected.”

4 9 THEY AMAZED A DINNER PARTY : Marvin Goldberger, interview, Pasadena.

49 HE LONG RESENTED THE LOSS: F-W, 113; WDY, 33.

MIT

Among Feynman’s fellow students and fraternity brothers, T. A. Welton,
Conyers Herring, John L. Joseph, Monarch L. Cutler, Leonard Mautner,
Maurice A. Meyer, and Daniel Robbins contributed the most revealing
interviews. Welton has set down his recollections of Feynman in a
manuscript titled “Memories” (CIT), and the American Institute of Physics
has the notebook in which he and Feynman developed their view of
quantum mechanics. Feynman’s MIT transcript and some other academic
records were preserved in his personal papers. The archives of MIT
provided some correspondence and yearbooks. Joan Feynman made
available her brother’s letters to her and her parents. Other important
sources include: on physics at MIT, the memoirs of John C. Slater (1975)
and Philip Morse (1977), and Schweber’s profile of Slater (1989); on the
early development of American quantum physics, Kevles 1987, Schweber,
forthcoming, and Sopka 1980; on the principle of least action. Lectures II19, Park 1988, Gregory 1988, and QED; on anti-Semitism in science,
Silberman 1985, Steinberg 1971, Lipset and Ladd 1971; Dobkowski
1979, and the remarkable correspondence between Feynman’s MIT
professors and Harry D. Smyth (MIT and a confidential file at PUL).
52 IN THAT CASE YOU ARE COMPLETELY LOST: Heisenberg 1971, 15–16.
52 THE AMERICAN MIND: Menge 1932, 11.
53 FEYNMAN CHANCED: F-W, 131.
53 BUT THE DEPRESSION HAD FORCED: Kevles 1987, 250–51.
53 NIGHTMARE: Ibid.
53 FEEL THE CRAVING: Menge 1932, 10.
53 DESPITE ANTI-SEMITIC MISGIVINGS: Rabi, for example, recalled Columbia’s

reluctance in appointing him as its first Jew in 1929: “What happened
in the American universities was [that] a department was in some
sense like a club, very collegiate, family… and certainly the Jews were
different, they didn’t fit in too well. “Quoted in Schweber, forthcoming.

53 HE HAD BEEN ONE OF THE YOUNG AMERICANS: Slater 1975, 131.
53 SLATER KEPT MAKING MINOR DISCOVERIES: Ibid., 130–35.
54 I DO NOT LIKE MYSTIQUES: Slater, oral-history interview, AIP. Quoted in

Schweber 1989, 53.

54 HE DOES NOT ORDINARILY ARGUE: Quoted in Schweber, forthcoming.
54 THEY STUDY CAREFULLY THE RESULTS: Ibid.
5 5 ASSEMBLING A PHYSICS DEPARTMENT : Karl T. Compton, “An Adventure in

Education,” New York Times, 15 September 1935.
55 BARELY A DOZEN GRADUATE STUDENTS: Morse 1977, 125
56 THE INSTRUCTORS TOLD THE STUDENTS: Slater and Frank 1933, v-vii.
56 WHY DON’T YOU TRY BERNOULLI’S: F-W, 136
56 THE FIRST DAY EVERYONE HAD TO FILL OUT: Welton 1983; F-W, 137. 56

COOPERATION IN THE STRUGGLE: Ibid.

56 MR. FEYNMAN, HOW DID YOU: Ibid. Welton added that Feynman’s solutions
were “always correct and frequently ingenious” and that “Stratton never
entrusted his lecture to me or any other student.”
57 A LIFEGUARD, SOME FEET UP THE BEACH: QED, 51–52.
58 OUR FRIEND DIRAC, TOO: Quoted in Schweber, forthcoming.
58 THERE CANNOT BE ANY ATOMS: Descartes 1955, 264.
59 AT THE SAME TIME: Ibid., 299.
60 FEYNMAN WOULD RESORT TO INGENIOUS COMPUTATIONAL TRICKS: F-W, 139
60 FEYNMAN HAD FIRST COME ON THE PRINCIPLE: Lectures, II-19.
61 SEEMED TO FEYNMAN A MIRACLE: Ibid., II-19–2.
61 IT SEEMS TO KNOW: Gregory 1988, 32–33.
61 THIS IS NOT QUITE THE WAY: Park 1988, 250.
61 IT IS NOT IN THE LITTLE DETAILS: Quoted in Jourdain 1913, 11.
61 PARK PHRASED THE QUESTION: Park 1988, 252.
62 LET NONE SAY THAT THE ENGINEER: The Tech, MIT, 1938, 275.
62 BUT AFTER THEY HAVE CONQUERED: Ibid.
62 ONE ENJOYED A WOOING PROCESS: SYJ, 17.
62 THEIR FRATERNITY BROTHERS DROVE FEYNMAN: SYJ, 19; F-W, 200–201.
6 3 OPPORTUNITIES TO HARASS FRESHMEN: Daniel Robbins, telephone

interview.

63 THE SECOND AND THIRD FLOORS: Maurice A. Meyer, telephone interview.
63 SO WORRIED ABOUT THE OTHER SEX: SYJ, 18.
6 3 COURSE NOTES TO BE HANDED DOWN: Michael Oppenheimer, interview,

New York.

64 DICK FELT HE GOT A GOOD BARGAIN: SYJ, 18.
64 LONG HOURS AT THE RAYMORE-PLAYMORE: Robbins, interview.
64 THE FEYNMANS LET HER PAINT A PARROT: Lewine, interview.
64 SPARED DICK THE NECESSITY: SYJ, 18.
64 ARLINE WATCHED UNHAPPILY: Meyer, interview.
64 HIS SECOND PROPOSAL OF MARRIAGE: F-W, 302 and 122.
65 THE IMPORTANCE OF SCIENCE IN AVIATION: WDY, 31.
65 AT ONE OF THE FATEFUL MOMENTS : Feynman to Lucille Feynman, 9 August

1945, PERS; Weisskopf, interview.

66 THE INSTITUTE JUSTIFIED: F-W, 164 66 A PAIN IN THE NECK: Ibid.
66 IN ONE COURSE HE RESORTED: He admitted it thirty years later,
embarrassed—“I lost my moral sense for a while”—to a scholar taking
oral history for a science archive. F-W, 164.
66 WHY DIDN’T THE ENGLISH PROFESSORS: Ibid, 165.
66 HE READ JOHN STUART MILL’S: F-L; SYJ, 30.
66 HE READ THOMAS HUXLEY’S: F-W, 170–73.
66 MEANWHILE IN PHYSICS ITSELF: “Subjects taken in physics at Mass.

Institute of Technology,” typescript, PUL.
67 WHOM ARLINE WAS READING: F-W, 165–66.
67 HE KNEW ALL ABOUT IMPERFECTION: WDY, 29.
67 PEOPLE LIKE DESCARTES WERE STUPID: F-W, 166.
67 HE TOOK A STRIP OF PAPER: WDY, 29–30.
68 IN THE DISCOVERY OF SECRET THINGS: Gilbert, De Magnete (1600). 68 LIKE

A PRIME MINISTER: F-W, 167.

68 THE PRAGMATIC SLATER: Schweber 1989, 58.
68 NOT FROM POSITIONS OF PHILOSOPHERS: Harvey, De Motu Cordis et

Sanguinis (1628).

68 UP IN HIS ROOM: F-W, 169–70.
69 I WONDER WHY I WONDER WHY: Ibid., 170; F-L (SYJ, 33).
69 A DISMAYED, DISORIENTED MOMENT: F-L.
70 HE DID DEVELOP A RUDIMENTARY THEORY: SYJ, 36.

70 HE SAT THROUGH LECTURES: Ibid., 32.
70 SO MUCH STUFF IN THERE: F-W, 166.
70 SPACE OF ITSELF AND TIME OF ITSELF: Quoted by Feynman in Lectures, I-

17–8.

72 A SMALL FABLE: Dirac 1971.
72 MY WHOLE EFFORT IS TO DESTROY: Quoted in Park 1988, 318.
73 OF COURSE QUITE ABSURD: DiraC 1971, 41.
74 DURING A LATE EROTIC OUTBURST: Pais 1986, 251–52.
74 THEY FILLED A NOTEBOOK: Feynman and Welton 1936–37.
74 JUST AS SCHRÖDINGER HAD DONE: F-W, 146
76 BOTH BOYS WERE WORRYING: Feynman and Welton 1936–37; F-W, 141.
76 WELTON WOULD SET TO WORK: F-W, 210–11.
77 THE CHUG-CHUG-DING-DING: Welton 1983; Welton, interview; F-W, 142–

44.

77 THEY WORKED OUT FASTER METHODS: F-W, 152–53.
77 ALL I’VE DONE IS TAKE: Quoted in “Bright Flashes from a Mind of Marvel,”

Washington Post, 6 January 1990.
78 UTTER CERTAINTY: Heisenberg 1971, 11.
78 MORE THAN THAT OF ALL MANKIND: Ibid., 10.
78 FEYNMAN WANTED TO BE A SHOP MAN: F-W, 154–56; F-L.
79 ENRICO FERMI MADE HIS OWN: Segrè 1980, 204–6; Rhodes 1987, 210–

12.

79 UNEXPECTEDLY, THE SLOW NEUTRONS : Enrico Fermi, 

“Artificial
Radioactivity Produced by Neutron Bombardment,” in Weaver 1987,
2:74.

79 FEYNMAN AND WELTON, JUNIORS: F-W, 162.
80 THERE WAS JUST ONE ESSENTIAL TEXT: Bethe et al. 1986.
80 THAT CLOUDS SCATTERED SUNLIGHT: F-W, 176.
81 IT CAME JUST ONE STEP PAST: Lectures, I-32–8.
81 ONE FOGGY DAY: F-W, 176.
82 FEYNMAN’S FIRST PUBLISHED WORK: Vallarta and Feynman 1939.
8 2 A PROVOCATIVE AND CLEVER IDEA: “Suppose we consider a particle sent
into an element of volume dV of scattering matter in a direction given
by the vector R. Let the probability of emerging in the direction R’ be
given by a scattering function f(R,R’) per unit solid angle. Conversely a
particle entering in the direction R’ will have a probability f(R’,R) of

emerging in the direction R. Let us assume that the scatterer (magnetic
field of the star) has the reciprocal property so that f(R,R’) = f(R’, R). In
our case the property is satisfied provided the particle’s sign is
reversed at the same time as its direction of motion. That is, the
probability of electrons going by any route is equal to the probability of
positrons going by the reverse route….” Ibid.

82 SUCH AN EFFECT IS NOT TO BE EXPECTED: Heisenberg 1946, 180.
82 YOU’RE THE LAST WORD: F-W, 178.
82 HE CAUGHT ONE CLASSMATE: Monarch L. Cutler, telephone interview and
personal communication; F-W, 179; Cutler, “Reflection of Light from
Multi-Layer Films,” senior thesis, MIT, 1939. The professors were
Hawley C. Cartwright and Arthur F. Turner.

8 3 THE PUTNAM COMPETITION: Joseph Callian, Andrew Gleason, telephone

interview.

83 ONE OF FEYNMAN’S FRATERNITY BROTHERS: Robbins, interview.
83 FEYNMAN LEARNED LATER: F-W, 191.
83 HIS FIRST THOUGHT HAD BEEN TO REMAIN: Ibid., 193–94.
8 3 PRACTICALLY PERFECT: John C. Slater to Dean of Graduate School,
Princeton, 12 January 1939, PUL. 83 THE BEST UNDERGRADUATE
STUDENT: Philip Morse to H. D. Smyth, 12 January 1939, PUL.

83 DIAMOND IN THE ROUGH: Wheeler 1989.
84 HAD NEVER BEFORE ADMITTED: Ibid.
8 4 THE PHYSICS SCORE WAS PERFECT: Individual Report of the Graduate
Record Examination: Feynman, Richard P., 1939, PERS. Besides
achieving a perfect physics result, he scored high in the 99th percentile
in mathematics; on the other hand, 69 percent of those taking the test
outscored him in verbal skills, 85 percent in literature, and 93 percent
in fine arts.

Feynman also applied to the University of California at Berkeley; the
department there made it clear that he would be accepted but
approved him only as the eighth alternate for a $650-a-year fellowship.
Robert Sproul to Feynman, 30 March 1939, and Raymond T. Birge to
Feynman, 1 June 1939, PERS.

84 IS FEYNMAN JEWISH?: H. D. Smyth to Philip Morse, 17 January 1939, MIT.
84 FEYNMAN OF COURSE IS JEWISH: Slater to Smyth, 7 March 1939, PUL.
84 PHYSIOGNOMY AND MANNER, HOWEVER: Morse to Smyth, 18 January 1939,

MIT. Princeton was persuaded. Smyth later heard about Feynman’s
success in the Putnam competition and wrote: “My colleagues keep
insisting that Feynman is not coming here next year because he took
an examination and won a prize fellowship at Harvard. My position is
that as long as I have his acceptance and no further word from him he
is coming here even if he has been offered the presidency of Harvard.”
Smyth to Morse, 8 June 1939, MIT.

85 WE KNOW PERFECTLY WELL: Quoted in Silberman 1985, 90.
85 THEY TOOK OBVIOUS PRIDE: Francis Russell, “The Coming of the Jews,”

quoted in Steinberg 1971, 71.

85 BECAUSE, BROTHER, HE IS BURNING: Thomas Wolfe, You Can’t Co Home

Again (New York: Dell, 1960), 462. Quoted in Kevles 1987, 279.

85 IT WAS ALSO UNDERSTOOD: Sopka 1980, 4:105.
85 NEW YORK JEWS FLOCKED OUT HERE: Davis 1968, 83.
85 A FRUSTRATED OPPENHEIMER: J. R. Oppenheimer to Raymond T. Birge, 4
November 1943, 26 May 1944, and 5 October 1944, in Smith and
Weiner 1980, 268, 275, and 284.

85 IF FEYNMAN EVER SUSPECTED: Silberman 1985, 91–92; F-W, 198.
86 HALF A LINE: F-W, 182.
87 INSTEAD OF SPINNINC: Ibid., 180.
87 A SCIENCE OF MATERIALS: C. Smith 1981, 121–22.
87 MATTER IS A HOLOGRAPH OF ITSELF: Ibid., 122
88 AS FEYNMAN CONCEIVED THE STRUCTURE: Feynman 1939a and b.
90 IT IS TO BE EMPHASIZED: Feynman 1939a, 3; Conyers Herring, telephone

interview.

90 HE COMPLAINED THAT FEYNMAN WROTE: Robbins interview.
90 SO HE WAS SURPRISED TO HEAR: F-W, 186. Slater, in his textbooks,
preferred “Feynman’s theorem” as late as 1963, though he had found
that a German, H. Hellmann, had made the same discovery two years
in die
earlier. Slater 1963, 12–13; H. Hellmann, Einführung 
Quantenchemie (Leipzig: Deuticke, 1937).

91 THAT’S ALL I REMEMBER OF IT: F-W, 196.
91 IT SEEMED TO SOME THAT SLATER: Silvan S. Schweber, interview,

Cambridge, Mass.

91 MY SON RICHARD IS FINISHING: Morse 1977, 125–26.
91 MORSE TRIED NOT TO LAUGH: Ibid. Although Morse did not say so, part of

Melville’s concern was whether anti-Semitism would block a career in
physics; he expressed this in a similar conversation with John Wheeler
a few years later (Wheeler 1989).

PRINCETON

Wheeler and many of his later students gave me some understanding of
the relationship between Wheeler and Feynman. Wheeler 1979a and
Klauder 1972 are sources of recollections. Wheeler shared the draft of his
talk for a 1989 memorial session (Wheeler 1989). H. H. Barschall,
Leonard Eisenbud, Simeon Hutner, Paul Olum, Leo Lavatelli, and Edward
Maisel provided recollections of Feynman and the Princeton of the late
thirties and early forties. John Tukey and Martin Gardner illuminated the
history of Hexagons. Robert R. Wilson discussed the isotron project and
Feynman’s initiation into the Manhattan Project, as well as much later
history. The declassified documentary record of the isotron project,
including a series of technical papers by Feynman, is in the Smyth papers
at the American Philosophical Society.
93 A BLACK HOLE HAS NO HAIR: Wheeler and Ruffini 1971.
93 THERE IS NO LAW EXCEPT THE LAW: In Mehra 1973, 242.
93 I ALWAYS KEEP TWO LEGS GOING: John Archibald Wheeler, interview,

Princeton, N.J.

93 IN ANY FIELD FIND THE STRANGEST THING: Boslough 1986, 109.
93 INDIVIDUAL EVENTS: Quoted in Dyson 1980, 54. As Dyson says, “It sounds

like Beowulf, but it is authentic Wheeler.”

94 SOMEWHERE AMONG THOSE POLITE FAÇADES: In Steuwer 1979, 214–15.
94 WHEN HE WAS A BOY: Bernstein 1985, 29; Wheeler 1979a, 221.
94 SLATER AND COMPTON PREFERRED: Slater 1975, 170–71.
94 WHEELER STILL REMEMBERED: Wheeler 1979a, 224.
94 WHEN WHEELER MET HIS SHIP: Ibid., 272.
95 IT WAS THIS LAST IMAGE: Bohr and Wheeler 1939.
95 THEY SPENT A LATE NIGHT TRYING: Bernstein 1985, 38.
96 WHEELER SAID THAT HE WAS TOO BUSY: H. H. Barschall, telephone

interview.

96 YOU LOOK LIKE YOU’RE GOING TO BE: F-W, 209; Leonard Eisenbud,

telephone interview.

96 THE NEXT TIME FEYNMAN SAW BARSCHALL: Barschall, interview.
96 WHEELER’S POINTED DISPLAY: F-W, 194 and 215–16.
97 LAZY AND GOOD-LOOKING: Mizener 1949, 34 and 38.
97 A QUAINT CEREMONIOUS VILLAGE: Einstein to Queen Elizabeth of Belgium,
20 November 1933, quoted in Pais 1982, 453. 97 THE OBLIGATORY
BLACK GOWNS: SYJ, 49.

97 WHEN THE MATHEMATICIAN CARL LUDWIG SIEGEL RETURNED: Dyson 1988b, 3.
97 SURELY YOU’RE JOKING: F-W, 209; SYJ, 48–49.
97 IT BOTHERED HIM THAT THE RAINCOAT: Feynman to Lucille Feynman, 11

October 1939, PERS.
98 HE TRIED SCULLING: Ibid.
98 WHEN HE ENTERTAINED GUESTS: Feynman to Lucille Feynman, [?] October

1940, PERS.

9 8 HE EARNED FIFTEEN DOLLARS A WEEK: Feynman to Lucille Feynman, 3

March 1940, PERS.

98 THEY LISTENED WITH AWE: Edward Maisel, telephone interview; cf. F-W,

254.

98 AS WHEELER’S TEACHING ASSISTANT: Feynman to Lucille Feynman, 11
October 1939; Feynman notes on nuclear physics, H. H. Barschall
papers, AIP.

99 IN CHOOSING A THEME: Schweber, forthcoming.
99 IT SEEMS THAT SOME ESSENTIALLY NEW: Dirac 1935, 297; NL, 434.
99 WILHELM RÖNTGEN, THE DISCOVERER OF X RAYS: Dresden 1987, 11.
100 EVEN NOW FEYNMAN DID NOT QUITE UNDERSTAND: F-W, 230.
100 HE PROPOSED—TO HIMSELF: NL, 434.
100 SHAKE THIS ONE: Ibid.
101 IT IS FELT TO BE MORE ACCEPTABLE: Bridgman 1952, 14–15.
102 THE TENSION IN THE MEMBRANE: Weinberg 1977a, 19.
102 WHEELER, TOO, HAD REASONS: Wheeler, interview.
102 HE ENJOYED TRYING TO GUESS: SYJ, 69–71.
103 ALTHOUGH HE TEASED THEM: F-L, for SYJ, 71.
104 “FLEXAGONS” LAUNCHED GARDNER’S CAREER: Gardner 1989; Albers and

Alex-anderson 1985.

104 SIRS: I WAS QUITE TAKEN: Quoted in Gardner 1989, 13–14.
104 FEYNMAN SPENT SLOW AFTERNOONS: SYJ, 77.
105 DON’T BOTHER ME: F-L; WDY, 56.

105 HUMAN SPERMATOZOA: Maisel, interview.
105 THEY DECIDED THAT THEIR BRAINS: WDY, 55–57.
105 WE WERE INTERESTED AND HAPPY: John Tukey, interview, Princeton, N.J.
105 HE READ SOME POEMS ALOUD: Maisel interview.
105 RHYTHM IS ONE OF THE PRINCIPAL TRANSLATORS : “Some Notes on My Own

Poetry,” in Sitwell 1987, 131.

105 WHILE A UNIVERSE GROWS IN MY HEAD: “Tattered Serenade,” in Sitwell

1943, 19.

106 IT’S CLEAR TO EVERYBODY AT FIRST SIGHT: F-L.
106 WHEELER WAS ASKED FOR HIS OWN VERDICT: SYJ, 51; Wheeler 1989, 2–3.
106 THE PALMER PHYSICAL LABORATORY: Princeton University Catalogue:

General Issue, 1941–42. PUL.

107 PRINCETON’S GAVE FEYNMAN A SHOCK: SYJ, 49–50.
107 THE HEAD OF THE CYCLOTRON BANISHED FEYNMAN: Wheeler 1989, 3.
107 IT DOES NOT TURN AT ALL : A sound explanation—with a description of a
safer experiment than Feynman’s—is in Mach 1960, 388–90. But
physicists have never stopped arguing for either of the other answers,
and there is an ongoing literature.

109 THERE IS NO SIGNBOARD: Eddington 1940, 68.
109 UNFORTUNATELY HE HAD MEANWHILE LEARNED: F-W, 233; NL, 435.
110 A BROADCASTING ANTENNA, RADIATING ENERGY: Cf. Feynman’s later

discussion of radiation resistance, Lectures, I-32–1.

110 HE ASKED WHEELER: F-W, 233–34; NL, 436.
111 TIME DELAY HAD NOT BEEN A FEATURE: Wheeler and Feynman 1949, 426.
111 THE WAVES WERE NOW RETARDED: Lectures, I-28–2.
111 VIEWED IN CLOSE-UP: Morris 1984, 137.
112 SHAKE A CHARGE HERE: F-W, 237.
112 OH, WHADDYAMEAN, HOW COULD THAT BE?: Feynman 1965b.
112 THE WORK REQUIRED INTENSE CALCULATION: He wrote his parents in
November: “… last week things were going fast & neat as all heck, but
now I’m hitting some mathematical difficulties which I will either
surmount, walk around, or go a different way—all of which consumes all
my time—but I like to do very much & and am very happy indeed. I have
never thought so much so steadily about one problem … I’m just
beginning to see how far it is to the end & how we might get there
(altho aforementioned mathematical difficulties loom ahead)— SOME

FUN!” Feynman to Lucille Feynman, November 1940, PERS.
112 FOR THOSE WHO WERE SQUEAMISH: Feynman 1941a, fig. 3 caption.
112 THEN THE EFFECT OF THE SOURCE: Feynman 1948b, 941.
113 HE DESCRIBED IT TO HIS GRADUATE STUDENT FRIENDS: F-W, 237–38.
113 FOR EXAMPLE, COULD ONE DESIGN A MECHANISM: Wheeler and Feynman

1949, 426–27; Hesse 1961, 279.

113 AS LONG AS THE THEORY RELIED ON PROBABILITIES: Feynman 1941a, 20.
113 HE CONTINUED TO CHERISH A NOTION: Wheeler, oral-history interview, 17

November 1985, 12, AIP.

113 EARLY IN 1941 HE TOLD FEYNMAN: Cf. Recommendation of Richard
Phillips Feynman for Appointment as Porter Ogden Jacobus Fellow for
1941–1942, PUL.

113 AS THE DAY APPROACHED: F-W, 242–44; SYJ, 64–66.
115 PAULI DID OBJECT: Wheeler 1989, 26. Much later Feynman said of
Pauli’s objection: “It’s too bad that I cannot remember what, because
the theory is not right and the gentleman may well have hit the nail right
on the bazeeto.” F-W, 244. Pauli also presumably saw that the theory
could not be quantized.

115 DON’T YOU AGREE, PROFESSOR EINSTEIN: F-W, 244.
115 HIS OWN EQUIVOCAL BALANCE SHEET: Feynman to Lucille Feynman, 3

March 1940, PERS.

115 LECTURE HIS FRIENDS: Simeon Hutner, telephone interview.
116 HOURS WHEN I HAVEN’T MARKED DOWN: Feynman to Lucille Feynman,

November 1940, PERS.

116 BEFORE REVEALING IT TO ARLINE: Paul Olurn, telephone interview.
116 SHE SENT HIM A BOX OF PENCILS: WDY, 43–44.
116 IF YOU DON’T LIKE THE THINGS I DO: Arline Greenbaum to Feynman, n.d.,

PERS.

117 THIS STYLE OF TREATMENT: Teller 1988, 97.
117 AN OLD FRATERNITY FRIEND PICKED HER UP: Robbins, interview.
117 HE CERTAINLY BELIEVES IN PHYSICAL SOCIETY: Ibid.
117 STILL, HE WORRIED: F-W, 252–53; Feynman 1941a is the manuscript on
which he based the talk. Feynman and Wheeler 1941 is the published
abstract.

117 THE ACCELERATION OF A POINT CHARGE: Feynman 1941a.
118 WHEELER NEEDED LITTLE ENCOURAGEMENT: Feynman (F-W, 243) thought

the visit to Einstein “probably” came before his lecture; Wheeler
remembers it coming after, and the acknowledgments in Feynman
1941a and Wheeler and Feynman 1945 suggest that Wheeler must be
right.

118 EINSTEIN RECEIVED THIS PAIR: Wheeler 1989, 27.
118 FEYNMAN WAS STRUCK: F-W, 254.
118 AN OBSTINATE HERETIC: Quoted in Pais 1982, 462.
11 8 THE STRANGE LITTLE PAPER: Physikalische Zeitschrift 10(1909):323;

Wheeler 1989, 27; Pais 1982, 484.

119 WE MUST DISTINGUISH BETWEEN TWO TYPES: Feynman 1941a, 13;

Schweber 1986a, 459.

119 “PROF WHEELER,” HE WROTE: Feynman 1941a, 13.
120 THE SUN WOULD NOT RADIATE: Zeitschrift für Physik 10(1922):317,

quoted in Wheeler and Feynman 1945, 159–60.
120 LEWIS, TOO, WORRIED: Stuewer 1975, 485 and 499.
120 I AM GOING TO MAKE: Lewis, “The Nature of Light,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 12(1926):22, quoted in Wheeler and
Feynman 1945, 159 n.

121 THESE WERE DEAD ENDS: F-W, 260.
121 IT PROVED POSSIBLE TO COMPUTE PARTICLE INTERACTIONS: The first
application of the least-action principle in this context came in work of
which Wheeler and Feynman were not yet aware: a paper by A. D.
Fokker in Zeitschrift für Physik 58(1929):386.

121 IN THE ABSORBER THEORY: NL, 438–39.
121 THE MORE FEYNMAN WORKED: Ibid., 440.
121 WE HAVE, INSTEAD: Ibid.
122 AN IMAGE, SO TO SPEAK: Minkowski, “Space and Time,” in Weaver 1987,

2:156; Galison 1979.

122 FEYNMAN, I KNOW WHY: NL, 441.
122 IT WAS THE FIRST ANTIPARTICLE : Dirac, however, was reluctant to accept
the idea of a new antiparticle; he first assumed that this positively
charged particle must be 
the enormous
discrepancy in mass.

the proton, despite 

123 EINSTEIN HAD WORRIED ABOUT THIS: Park 1988, 234.
123 A PHILOSOPHER, ADOLPH CRÜNBAUM: “The Anisotropy of Time,” in Gold

1967, 149; Adolph Grünbaum, telephone interview.

123 MR. X: Feynman was enraged at the postconference suggestion that
the proceedings be published; he surprised the other participants by
declaring that there was no such subject as “the nature of time.”
Grünbaum said later: “Who was he worried about? If he was worried
about people in the know then this device failed. I don’t see how a man
of his towering eminence could feel his reputation would be
jeopardized.” Grünbaum, interview.

123 GRÜNBAUM: I WANT TO SAY: Gold 1967, 178–79.
124 WHATEVER HIDDEN BRAIN MACHINERY: Ibid., 183.
124 ONE’S SENSE OF THE NOW: Morris 1984, 146.
124 ONE CAN SAY EASILY ENOUGH: Park 1988, 234.
125 IT’S A POOR MEMORY: Gold 1967, 235.
125 THIS PROCESS LEADS: Ibid., 4.
126 THREE ARROWS OF TIME: Ibid., 13–14.
126 IT’S A VERY INTERESTING THING: Ibid., 186.
126 HE HAD COME TO BELIEVE: F-W, 301.
127 HE READ UP ON TYPHOID: Ibid., 303; WDY, 34–35.
127 FEYNMAN HAD FELT FROM THE BEGINNING: F-W, 246.
127 SOMETIMES WHEELER TOLD FEYNMAN: Ibid., 268. 127 “OH?” PAULI SAID:

Ibid., 245–46; cf. SYJ, 66.

127 WHEELER CANCELED THE LECTURE: F-W, 255 (“Q: The culmination of this
grand paper was what? A: The culmination was, his grand paper has
never come out").

128 DIRAC HAD PUBLISHED A PAPER: Dirac 1933.
128 THE NEXT DAY JEHLE AND FEYNMAN: NL, 443.
129 YOU AMERICANS!: F-W, 272; Schweber 1986a.
130 HERE IS A GREAT MAN: Robert R. Wilson, interview, Ithaca, N.Y.
130 NOTEBOOK OF THINGS: Feynman 1940; F-W, 287–88.
130 FEYNMAN WAS ASKED WHICH COLOR: F-W, 289–90.
130 FEYNMAN HAD BEEN FRUSTRATED: Ibid., 220–21.
131 AS I’M TALKING: WDY, 59.
132 IN FEYNMAN’S MIND A SEQUENCE: F-W, 273–74.
133 ALEXANDER FLEMING HAD NOTICED: Macfarlane 1984; Root-Bernstein

1989, 166–68.

134THAT PATHOLOGICALLY LUXURIANT MORBID GROWTH: Mann 1927, 286–87.
134 FEYNMAN WAS BACK IN THE LIBRARY: The account of Feynman’s

relationship with Arline Greenbaum is based in part on two versions by
Feynman: in F-W, 304; and in WDY, 35. Though more than twenty
years apart, these are not independent versions; their wording is so
consistent that Feynman must have reviewed his copy of the AIP
interview before tape-recording the version that was then published,
with further editing, in Feynman 1988.

135 GOODBYE LOVE LETTER: WDY, 38.
135 WHEN SHE CONFRONTED RICHARD: Cf. Arline Greenbaum to Feynman, 3

June 1941, PERS.

135 HE WAS SUPPORTING HIMSELF: Fellowship records, PUL.
135 WHEN HE TOLD A UNIVERSITY DEAN: F-W, 309.
136 A PHYSICISTS’ WAR: Kevles 1987.
136 A NUMBER IN THE AIR: Wilson, interview.
136 THE HUNGARIAN CONSPIRACY: Rhodes 1987, 308.
136 I NEVER THOUGHT OF THAT: Ibid., 305.
136 WILSON AND SEVERAL OTHER PHYSICISTS: Wilson, interview.
137 THE BRITISH HAD INVENTED: Rigden 1987, 130.
137 IT’S SIMPLE—IT’S JUST A KIND OF WHISTLE: Edward U. Condon, quoted in

Kevles 1987, 304.

137 OFFERED TO JOIN THE SIGNAL CORPS: Feynman 1981.
137 FROM THEIR WINDOWS THE BELL RESEARCHERS: SYJ, 83–84.
137 IT WAS A CHANCE TO SERVE: F-W, 294.
138 ONE-FOURTH OF THE NATION’S SEVEN-THOUSAND-ODD PHYSICISTS: Kevles
1987, 320. He estimates that the number included “three quarters of
[the physics profession’s] eminent leadership.”

138 THE FIELD OF MECHANISMS, DEVICES: Compton, “Scientists Face the World

of 1942,” quoted in Schweber, forthcoming.

138 A PRIMITIVE SORT OF ANALOG COMPUTER: F-W, 294–95; SYJ, 85–87.
138 FEYNMAN FOUND HIMSELF DRAWN: Mitchell Feigenbaum, interview, New

York.

139 HE CONSIDERED THE CASE OF TWO PARTICLES: Feynman 1941b.
139 THIS PREOCCUPATION WITH: Ibid.
139 THERE WAS A POSSIBILITY: Wilson, interview.
139 AN EXPATRIATE GERMAN CHEMIST: Peierls 1985, 169.
140 ONE MORNING HE HAD GONE INTO HIS KITCHEN: Rhodes 1987, 340.
140 STUDENTS WERE ASKED TO CHOOSE: Lavatelli, interview.

140 IF THERE WAS ANY BALONEY: Wilson, interview.
140 TO HIS DISMAY: Ibid.; F-W, 297.
140 SLIGHTLY DISILLUSIONED WITH WAR WORK: “I guess my patriotism had

disintegrated or something.” F-W, 297.

140 LONG AFTERWARD, AFTER ALL THE BOMB MAKERS: Ibid.
141 TO GET HELP WITH THE ELECTRONICS: Wilson, interview.
141 THE SENIOR THEORETICIAN CRUMPLED: Olum, interview.
142 WHAT’S HAPPENING HERE?: Ibid.
142 IT WAS LIKE A CARTOON: F-W, 298.
142 ERNEST LAWRENCE WAS CALLING A COMPETING DEVICE : Heilbron and

Seidel 1989, 515–16.

143 WHEN EXPERIMENTERS TRIED HIGHER VOLTAGES: F-W, 320.
143 THE PHYSICISTS HAD TO INVENT: Ernest D. Klema, n.d., Response to

Nuclear Physics Questionnaire. AIP.

143 MEANWHILE THE PROJECT’S WORST ENEMY: R. Wilson 1972, 474–75.
143 WHEN GENERAL LESLIE R. GROVES: Groueff 1967, 36–38.
144 FEYNMAN CARRIED THE ISOTRON’S FLYSPECK: F-W, 325–26. 144 THE FIRST

SCIENTIFIC LECTURE HE HAD EVER HEARD: Ibid., 325.

144 WILSON WAS STUNNED: He wrote Smyth nearly a year later, from Los
Alamos: “I am still not able to think objectively about the closing down
of our project. It was certainly a hysterical move for the committee to
shut the project down before the completion of the contract.” Wilson to
Smyth, 27 November 1943, LANL.

144 SMYTH AND WIGNER BOTH FELT PRIVATELY: Davis 1968, 136.
144 LAWRENCE’S CALUTRON SIMPLY USED: Lavatelli, quoted in Davis 1968,

135.

144 FEYNMAN HAD PRODUCED DETAILED CALCULATIONS: Feynman 1942f;

Feynman 1943a; Smyth and Wilson 1942, 5.
145 MY WIFE DIED THREE YEARS AGO: Olum, interview.
146 IT WAS TIME TO FINISH HIS THESIS: Wheeler to Feynman, 26 March 1942,

AIP.

146 LATER HE REMEMBERED: F-W, 281.
146 GREAT DIFFICULTIES HAVE ARISEN: Feynman 1942a.
146 MESON FIELD THEORIES HAVE BEEN SET UP: Feynman 1942b, 1 n.
146 DERIVED CONCEPT: Feynman 1942a.
146 WE CAN TAKE THE VIEWPOINT: Ibid.

147 IS IN FACT INDEPENDENT OF THAT THEORY: Feynman 1942b, 5.
147 WHEN HE WAS DONE: Wheeler and Wigner 1942.
147 FEYNMAN CONCLUDED WITH A BLUNT CATALOG: Feynman 1942b, 73–74.
147 IN THE MATHEMATICS WE MUST DESCRIBE: Ibid.
148 HONORARY ELECTRICIAN’S LICENSE: Feynman to George W. Beadle, 4
January 67, CIT. Turning down the first honorary degree he was
offered, he told the president of the University of Chicago that he
remembered “the guys on the same platform receiving honorary
degrees without work—and 
‘honorary degree’ was a
felt an 
debasement of the idea of a ‘degree which confirms certain work has
been accomplished.’ … I swore then that if by chance 1 was ever
offered one I would not accept it. Now at last (25 years later) you have
given me a chance to carry out my vow.”

148 THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN HUSBAND AND WIFE: Flick 1903, 289.
148 MANY A YOUNG CONSUMPTIVE MOTHER: Ibid., 288.
148 MARRIAGE IS APT TO BE: Underwood 1937, 342.
149 THEY WERE BOTH SO YOUNG: Solomon 1952, 122.
150 YOUR HEALTH IS IN DANCER: Lucille Feynman to Feynman, “Why I object

to your marriage to Arline at this time,” n.d,, PERS.

150 HE TOLD HIS FATHER: Feynman to Melville Feynman, 15 June 1942,

PERS.

150 BUT JUST A FEW DAYS LATER: Feynman to Lucille Feynman, “Why I want to

get married,” June 1942, PERS.

150 IN NO TIME FLAT: Arline Greenbaum to Feynman, June 1942, PERS.
151 SHE WALKED DOWN: Jules Greenbaum, telephone interview.
151 THEY MARRIED IN A CITY OFFICE: WDY, 42–43.
151 FEARFUL OF CONTAGION: “I knew not to kiss her… because the disease, I
was afraid to catch it” (F-L); by contrast, the edited version, in SYJ, 43,
says that Feynman, “bashful,” kissed Arline on the cheek.

LOS ALAMOS

I did not seek the security clearance necessary to make direct use of the
archives of the Los Alamos National Laboratory; however, the archives
eventually provided a body of declassified material, including the notebook
Feynman began keeping in his first days on the site, portions of his

record, and many 

for Military Purposes, and a 

personnel 
technical documents—critical-mass
calculations, analyses of computing issues, and notes and diagrams from
Feynman’s inspections of the Oak Ridge plant. Lillian Hoddeson and
Gordon Baym shared their interview with Feynman about many of his
classified notes. Also declassified is Feynman’s manuscript for the
account of the theoretical-physics division in what became the Smyth
r e p o r t, Atomic Energy 
related
correspondence between Smyth, Oppenheimer, and Groves. Mary D. Lee
had preserved a copy of Feynman’s 9 August 1945 letter to his mother,
describing the Trinity test. Feynman had saved Arline’s personal papers,
including their correspondence, her correspondence with her family, and
other items. Much has been written about the Manhattan Project and the
scientists who participated in it. Still, one or two things may remain to be
said. Many individual memoirs are available. The best overall history is
Richard Rhodes’s Making of the Atomic Bomb. Hawkins et al. 1983 is
extremely useful for its technical detail. If there was ever a time when
eyewitness accounts could be obtained uncontaminated by hindsight and
by many previous tellings, it is long past. I reinterviewed some participants
and friends of Feynman anyway (Bethe, Weisskopf, Wilson, Olum, Welton,
Rose Bethe, Philip Morrison, Robert Bacher, Robert Christy,
Robert Walker, Dorothy Walker). Nicholas Metropolis expanded on his
published recollections of the laboratory’s nascent computer science.
Other sources on computation include Alt 1972, Asprey 1990, Bashe
et al. 1986, Goldstine 1972, Nash 1990, and Williams 1985. Feynman
retold his best stories in a talk (1975) at the University of California,
Santa Barbara. The tone of his letters in 1945–45 is very different, and
I have relied most heavily on these.

153 HE SWEATED: Feynman to Lucille Feynman, 9 August 1945, PERS.
153 THEN, SUDDENLY, MUSIC : Ibid.; Weisskopf, interview. But one of the
oddities in the memories of that moment is how many different
scientists heard different music. James W. Kunetka, for example,
(1979) heard “The Star-Spangled Banner.”

154 MINUS THIRTY MINUTES: Feynman to Lucille Feynman, 9 August 1945.
154 AND THEN, WITHOUT A SOUND: Frisch 1979, 164.
154 IT BLASTED; IT POUNCED: Talk at Boston Institute for Religious and Social

Studies, 3 January 1946. In Rabi 1970, 138–39.

155 WHAT WAS THAT? : Peierls 1985, 202; Feynman 1975, 131. The
correspondent was William L. Laurence. Eventually he came to terms
with the sound he heard: “Then out of the great silence came a mighty
thunder … the blast from thousands of blockbusters going off
simultaneously … the big boom … earthquake … the first cry of a
newborn world.” Laurence 1959, 117.

155 ENRICO FERMI, CLOSER TO THE BLAST: E.g., Kunetka 1979, 169.
155 ANOTHER PHYSICIST THOUGHT FEYNMAN: Jette 1977, 105.
155 NOW HE HAD BEEN DRIVEN SO LOW: Frisch 1979, 155.
156 A CHILL, WHICH WAS NOT THE MORNING COLD: Quoted in Rhodes 1987,

675.

156 IT’S A TERRIBLE THING THAT WE MADE: SYJ, 118.
156 WE JUMPED UP AND DOWN: Feynman to Lucille Feynman, 9 August 1945.
157 IT IS A WONDERFUL SIGHT: Ibid.
157 WE BECAME THEN: R. Wilson 1972, 475.
157 HAVE THEM DESCRIBE TO YOU: F-W, 328; Wilson, interview.
157 HE DID GATHER INFORMATION: F-W, 329.
157 WE ALL CAME TO MEET THIS BRASH CHAMPION: Morrison 1988, 42; also
Morrison, oral-history interview, 7 February 1967, AIP, 34: “He was
already heralded as this very clever fellow from Princeton who knew
everything. And he did know everything, you know.”

157 FEYNMAN SAW THAT THE PROBLEM: F-W, 330.
158 SCHWINGER, WHO WAS AMBIDEXTROUS: Bernard Feld, quoted in

Schweber, forthcoming.

158 SOMEDAY WHEN THEY MAKE A MOVING PICTURE: F-W, 332; Olum, interview.
159 OPPENHEIMER’S FORMULA: Peierls, quoted in Heilbron and Seidel 1989,

256. 159 A PHYSICS OF BANK SHOTS: Rhodes 1987, 149.

159 WHY DON’T YOU HAVE FISH: Peierls 1985, 190.
159 HE CALLED LONG-DISTANCE: F-W, 337.
160 NOBODY COULD THINK STRAIGHT: Davis 1968, 163.
160 THE STATE OF SECRECY WAS SUCH: F-W, 332.
160 FEYNMAN’S CONTRARIETY WARRED: Feynman 1975, 108.
160 SHE HAD BEGGED RICHARD: Arline Feynman to Feynman, 26 March

1943, PERS.

160 ARLINE CRIED NIGHT AFTER NIGHT: Ibid. and Arline Feynman to Feynman,

19 March 1943, PERS.

161 YET ONE POSSIBILITY WAS PLAYING ITSELF OUT: F-H, 5.
161 AT FIRST THE ONLY TELEPHONE LINK: John H. Manley, “A New Laboratory

Is Born,” in Badash et al. 1980, 31.

161 WATER BOILER: Hawkins et al. 1983, 104–5; F-H, 4–6.
162 A TABLE BEHIND A HEAVY CONCRETE WALL: Groueff 1967, 210.
162 THE DRIVER’S LICENSE OF A NAMELESS ENGINEER: State of New Mexico

Operator’s License no. 185, 1944, PERS.
162 WELCOME TO LOS ALAMOS: Frisch 1979, 150.
163 TALKS ARE NOT NECESSARILY ON THINGS: Notebook, “A-83–002 7–7,”

LANL.

163 REFLECT NEUTRONS … KEEP BOMB IN: Ibid.
164 MOST OF WHAT WAS TO BE DONE: Feynman 1944.
164 THE GHOSTWRITER WAS FEYNMAN: Smyth to Oppenheimer, 1 February

1945, and Oppenheimer to Smyth, 14 April 1945, LANL.
164 FEYNMAN, GIVING SMYTH A TOUR: SYJ, 118; Groueff 1967, 326.
164 A REQUEST FOR OSMIUM: Groueff 1967, 326.
164 THE FIRST DOT OF PLUTONIUM: Hawkins et al. 1983, 72.
165 LISTED THE MAIN QUESTIONS: Feynman 1944. Feynman’s references to
tamper materials, along with some other sensitive technical details,
were deleted from the report as published.

165 WHEN THEY HEARD THAT LAUGH: E.g., Joseph O. Hirschfelder, “ScientificTechnological Miracle at Los Alamos,” in Badash et al. 1980, 81.

165 BETHE AND FEYNMAN—STRANGE PAIR: Frisch 1979, 154.
165 YOU’RE CRAZY: F-W, 339; Bethe, interview; Groueff 1967, 205.
166 IF FEYNMAN SAYS IT THREE TIMES: Schweber, forthcoming.
166 He had worked on: Groueff 1967, 207.
166 A WESTERN UNION KIDDIEGRAM: Rhodes 1987, 416.
166 BETHE HAD LEARNED HIS PHYSICS: Bernstein 1980, 29.
166 AT ROME: L. Fermi 1954, 217.
166 LIGHTNESS OF APPROACH: Bernstein 1980, 31.
168 BETHE LEFT THE INITIAL LECTURES: F-H, 40; Bethe, interview.
168 THE DANGEROUS PRACTICALITIES: Hawkins et al. 1983, 13.
168 FEYNMAN SPENT A LONG TIME TήINKING: F-H, 12–13.
168 BRANCHING-PROCESSES THEORY: Ulam 1976, 153; Harris 1963; David

Hawkins, “The Spirit of Play,” in Cooper 1989.

169 HE ARRIVED AT A PRACTICAL METHOD : Bethe, interview. 169 BEGAN TO LOVE

HANS BETHE: F-W, 409–10.

169 HE HAD INVITED ONE OF HIS MIT FRATERNITY FRIENDS: Feynman to Daniel

Robbins, 24 June 1942, PERS.

169 HE WOULD BE PARTLY OUT OF THE RUSH: Feynman to Lucille Feynman, 24

June 1943, PERS.

169 WHEN HE WAS INVITED TO MEET A STRANGER: Welton 1983, 7.
170 DO YOU KNOW WHAT WE’RE DOING HERE?: Ibid.
170 IT STINKS: Davis 1968, 215.
170 AS WELTON LISTENED: Welton, interview.
170 HE WAS AMUSED AND IMPRESSED: Welton 1983, 8–9; Welton, interview.
171 WELTON BECAME THE FOURTH PHYSICIST: Along with Frederick Reines,

Julius Ashkin, and Richard Ehrlich.

171 DEFINITELY UNGENTLE HUMOR: Welton 1983, 9.
171 ALL RIGHT, PENCILS: F-H, 42–43.
172 BY DEFINITION, AT CRITICAL MASS: Hawkins et al. 1983, 77.
172 FOR A SPHERICAL BOMB: Welton 1983, 11; Welton, interview.
173 BETHE HAD TOLD THEM: Bethe, interview; F-H, 23.
173 WHEN THE LOS ALAMOS METALLURGISTS: Hawkins et al. 1983, 139.
173 IT PUSHED THE THEORISTS PAST THE LIMITS: Welton 1983, 13.
173 FEYNMAN SOLVED THAT PROBLEM: Feynman and Welton 1947, a booklength report, draws together the chief findings of Feynman and his
group on critical-mass calculations and neutron scattering. Feynman’s
own contribution to the version of the problem in which neutrons are
assumed 
to have a single characteristic velocity—a practical
simplification of methods developed by others— appears in Feynman
1946b.

173 THE EXPERIENCE OF ACTUAL COMPUTATION: F-H, 23–24.
173 AS HE DROVE THE MEN: Welton 1983, 14.
173 THAT SEEMED AN IMPOSSIBLE LEAP: Ashkin, Ehrlich, and Feynman 1944.
Welton recalled wryly (1983, 14): “Only a short period of reflection was
… required before Feynman announced that we were going to take the
accumulated computational results from T-2. put them through the meat
grinder, season them with some further insights (yet to be produced)
and extrude this mixture as a handy interpolation-extrapolation
formula.”

174 UNFORTUNATELY CANNOT BE EXPECTED: Feynman 19466, 3.

174 UNFORTUNATELY THE FIGURES CONTAINED : Ashkin, Ehrlich, and Feynman

1944, 4.

174 THESE METHODS ARE NOT EXACT: Feynman and Welton 1947, 6. 174 AN

INTERESTING THEOREM WAS FOUND: Feynman 1946b, 3.
174 IN ALL CASES OF INTEREST: Feynman and Welton 1947, 6.
175 BETHE’S DEPUTY, WEISSKOPF: Weisskopf, oral-history interview, 31, AIP.
176 HE TOLD THEM HE COULD SPOT: F-H, 18.
176 WELL, FOUR HOURS AND TWENTY MINUTES AGO: Nicholas Metropolis,

interview, Los Alamos, N.M.

176 YOU KNOW HOW IT IS WITH DAYLIGHT SAVING TIME: Morrison 1988, 42.
177 YOU WANT TO KNOW EXACTLY?: Feynman 1975, 109.
177 THAT’S 1.35: F-H, 41.
178 ALL RIGHT. IT’S PI TO THE FOURTH: Ibid., 39.
178 THEN PAUL OLUM SPOKE UP: Olum, interview; F-L for SYJ, 176.
178 SIMILARLY, WORKING WITH BETHE: Bethe, interview.
179 THEY WERE RARELY USED: Metropolis and Nelson 1982, 348–49.
180 LET’S LEARN ABOUT THESE DAMNED THINGS: Metropolis, interview.
180 THEY SPENT HOURS TAKING APART : Bethe, interview; Metropolis 1990,

237; Metropolis and Nelson 1982, 349.

180 ESCALATION OF THE COMPUTATION EFFORT : Metropolis and Nelson 1982,

350.

181 SO MUCH MORE POWERFUL WERE THEY: Weisskopf 1991, 134.
181 EVEN BEFORE THE IBM MACHINES ARRIVED: F-W, 362–63; Brode 1960;

Feynman 1975, 125.

182 HE LEFT FEYNMAN WITH TWO ENDURING MEMORIES: Feynman 1975, 129.
182 FEYNMAN THOUGHT AT FIRST: F-H, 55–56: “We discovered a very
annoying thing that we didn’t understand…. When we set up the
differential equation, we solved it numerically and the numbers seemed
to come out irregularly. Then we would check and it would be the same
thing…. The points would sort of wiggle around irregularly, and [von
Neumann] explained that that was correct, that was all right, that was
very interesting…. And there was nothing we could do about it. We just
had to live with it, and we did…. We were terribly surprised by the fact
that we would do the numbers over again, and it was the same crazy
irregularities.”

182 EACH TIME IT IS TURNED ON. T. Reid 1984, 14; Alt 1972, 693; Metropolis

and Nelson 1982, 352.

182 SOME INTERESTING PROPERTIES OF NUMBERS: The lecture later became
an element of his course at Cornell in mathematical methods and then,
refined once again, became a remarkable set piece in his Feynman
Lectures on Physics. Feynman to Lucille Feynman, 29 February 1944;
Lectures, I-22.

182 ALL THE MIGHTY MINDS: Feynman to Lucille Feynman, 29 February 1944.
184 HE IS BY ALL ODDS THE MOST BRILLIANT: Oppenheimer to Birge, 4

November 1943, in Smith and Weiner 1980, 269.

184 HE IS A SECOND DIRAC: Oppenheimer to Birge, November 4 1943, in

Smith and Weiner 1980, 269.

184 SHE LAUGHED, ASKING: Arline Feynman to Lucille and Melville Feynman,

28 June 1943; F-L for SYJ, 46.

185 ONCE, IN A FANCIFUL CONVERSATION : Moss 1987, 68. 185 A PIONEER

PEOPLE STARTING A NEW TOWN: Brode 1960, 7.

185 THE MOST EXCLUSIVE CLUB IN THE WORLD: James Tuck, quoted in Davis

1968, 184.

185 WHAT EXACTLY IS SQUARE: Tuck, quoted in Brode 1960, 7.
185 ONE PARTY FEATURED AN ORIGINAL BALLET: Brode 1960, 6.
186 CODES, CIPHERS OR ANY FORM OF SECRET WRITING: Reprinted in Jette

1977, 130.

186 IT’S VERY DIFFICULT WRITING: Feynman 1975, 112.
187 RICHARD AND ARLINE TALKED ABOUT: Ibid.
187 THERE ARE CAPTAINS: Feynman to Lucille Feynman, 10 December

1943.

187 I EXPLAINED IT TO HIM: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 8 March 1945.
187 THE SECURITY STAFF TOLERATED THEM: Hirschfelder, in Badash et al.

1980, 79.

187 THE NEW DISPENSER STRUCK FEYNMAN: Olum, interview.
187 HE HAD GOT SO DRUNK: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 9 May 1945,

PERS.

188 MORALLER AND MORALLER: Ibid.
188 TWO MEN ARRIVED: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 4 April 1945, PERS.
188 BECAUSE I LIKE PUZZLES SO MUCH: Ibid.
188 THAT ONE INSIGHT: SYJ, 124.
189 THE LOS ALAMOS PHYSICISTS: E.g., Frisch 1979, 154.

189 I OPENED THE SAFES: F-L for SYJ, 121–22.
189 THIS LAST INSIGHT ALONE: SYJ, 133.
189 BY FIDDLING WITH HIS OWN SAFE: Ibid., 124–25.
190 FEYNMAN REVELED IN THE CLOUDS: Feynman to Lucille Feynman, 10

December 1943, PERS.

190 SEE, I’M GETTING AN AESTHETIC SENSE: Ibid.
191 NOT CERTAIN WHETHER THIS TIME: Ian McEwan, The Innocent (New York:

Dou-bleday, 1990), 85.

191 HE WOULD SIT IN A CROUP: F-W, 317.
191 HE FOUND A WAY: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 3 April 1945, PERS.
191 YOU ARE A STRONG AND BEAUTIFUL WOMAN: Ibid.
192 DON’T GET SCARED THO: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 24 April 1945.
192 YOU’RE NEVER THAT: Arline Feynman to Feynman, February 1945.
192 THE SCIENTISTS WERE IN AN UPROAR: R. Wilson 1974, 160.
193 I DO NOT KNOW—ALTHOUGH THERE ARE THOSE: Cohn 1943, 56–57; Arline

Feynman, handwritten notes, PERS.

193 DARLING I’M BEGINNING: Arline Feynman to Feynman, 16 January 1945.
193 SHE REMINDED HIM OF THE FUTURE: Arline Feynman to Feynman, 17

January 1945.

194 WE HAVE TO FIGHT HARD: Ibid.
194 DRINK SOME MILK: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 2 May 1945, PERS.
194 HER WEIGHT HAD FALLEN: Arline Feynman, notebook of medical records

and expenses, PERS.

194 YOU ARE A NICE GIRL: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 2 May 1945.
194 TIME PASSES FAST: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 19 April 1945, PERS.
194 HE HAD HEARD ABOUT A NEW DRUG: Feynman to Richard Gubner, draft,
n.d:, and Gubner to Feynman, 29 August 1944 and 14 November
1944, PERS.

194 JOAN WAS DAZZLED: Joan Feynman to Arline Feynman, 29 April 1945,

PERS.

195 HE THOUGHT HE SAW SYMPTOMS: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 18 May

1945.

195 HAVE IT DONE BY A SPECIALIST : Henry Barenblatt to Arline Feynman, 19

April 1945 and 23 April 1945, PERS.

195 A DOCTOR AT LOS ALAMOS TOLD RICHARD : Feynman to Arline Feynman, 3

May 1945.

195 THE SAME DOCTOR: Ibid.
195 PS. 59-TO-BE: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 15 May 1945.
195 HE DRIFTED THROUGH THE PAGES: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 17 May

1945.

195 KEEP HANGING ON: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 9 May 1945.
195 ENTIRE NATION CELEBRATES: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 10 May

1945.

195 AT THE MAYO CLINIC: Waksman 1964, 127–28.
196 THE DOCTOR WHO FIRST ISOLATED: Ibid., 115–18.
196 WORKERS HANDLING PLUTONIUM: Hawkins et al. 1983, 163–64.
196 ONE MAN, HARRY DAGHLIAN: L. Fermi 1980, 99; de Hoffman 1974, 166–

67; Frisch 1979, 159–60.

197 FEYNMAN HIMSELF PROPOSED A SAFER EXPERIMENT: Hawkins et al. 1983,

89.

197 AT TELLER’S REQUEST: E. Teller to R. F. Bacher, 27 March 1944, LANL.
198 HE BECAME RESPONSIBLE FOR CALCULATING: E.g., K. T. Bainbridge to
Members of Committee on Fabrication and Assembly of Active
Materials, 20 July 1944 and 5 September 1944, LANL.

198 IT IS EXPECTED THAT A CONSIDERABLE FRACTION : Bethe to Oppenheimer, 8
November 1944, and Bethe to Bacher, 3 January 1945, LANL; Robert
F. Bacher, interview, Santa Barbara, Calif.

198 COMPLETE AUTHORITY: Bethe to Oppenheimer, 26 January 1945, LANL.
198 DEAR SIR, AT THE PRESENT TIME: J. L. Patterson to Major W. E. Kelley,
19 September 1944, and W. E. Kelley to Feynman, 21 September
1944, LANL.

198 AS SECRE HAD DISCOVERED: Feynman 1975, 119–21.
198 FEYNMAN BEGAN BY RETRACING: F-H, 33.
199 HE REALIZED THAT THE PLANT WAS HEADED: F-W, 353–54.
199 IN ANSWER TO THE EASTMAN SUPERINTENDENT’S QUESTION: Feynman to

Major W. E. Kelley, 27 September 1944, LANL.

199 DURING CENTRIFUGING SOME PECULIAR MOTION: Feynman to Colonel

Arthur E. Peterson, 18 September 1945.
199 IS CT-1 EMPTY WHEN WE DROP: Notes, LANL.
199 HE ALSO INVENTED A PRACTICAL METHOD: Feynman 1945.
199 A FEW PEOPLE, LONG AFTERWARD: E.g.: “Unknowingly, he saved my life
and the lives of everyone at Oak Ridge in those challenging years …”

Irwin H. Goodwin to Ralph Leighton, 8 December 1988.

199 FEYNMAN’S FIRST VISIT TO OAK RIDGE: F-L for SYJ, 104.
199 YOU SHOULD SAY: Los Alamos cannot accept: Feynman 1975, 122.
200 HE HAD TO GROW UP FAST: Ibid.
200 SOMETIME THAT SPRING IT STRUCK HIM: F-H, 14.
200 HITCHHIKING BACK ONE SUNDAY NIGHT: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 24

May 1945, PERS.

200 BUT THEY WERE KIND OF UGLY: Ibid.
200 MY WIFE: I AM ALWAYS : Feynman to Arline Feynman, 6 June 1945,

PERS.

201 ONE NIGHT HE AWOKE: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 14 June 1945,

PERS.

201 THE CROUP’S PRODUCTIVITY HAD RISEN: Bethe, interview.
201 HE HAD INVENTED A SYSTEM: F-W, 371–74.
201 WHEN HE REACHED HER ROOM: Ibid., 343–46; F-L for WDY, 50–53.
202 THE NURSE RECORDED: Certificate of Death, PERS.
202 HE CAME IN AND SAT DOWN: Robert and Dorothy Walker, interview,

Tesuque, N.M.

202 WHEN HE COMES IN: Joan Feynman, interview.
202 AN ARMY CAR MET HIM: Feynman to Lucille Feynman, 9 August 1945,

PERS.

203 IF A MAN HAD MERELY CALCULATED : De Hoffman 1974, 171–72. 203

CREATED NOT BY THE DEVILISH INSPIRATION: Smyth 1945, 223.

204 NO MONOPOLY: Notes, n.d., PERS.
204 MOST WAS KNOWN: Ibid.
204 IT WOULD SEEM TO ME THAT UNDER THESE CIRCUMSTANCES: Oppenheimer

to Birge, 26 May 1944, in Smith and Weiner 1980, 276.

204 BIRGE FINALLY CAME THROUGH: Oppenheimer informed Birge of
Feynman’s choice in a blisteringly formal tone: “I am glad that you are
going to take steps to increase the strength of the department….
Several months ago Dr. Feynman accepted a permanent appointment
with the Physics Department at Cornell University. I do not know details
of salary and rank, but they are presumably satisfactory to him. I shall of
course do my best to call to your attention any men who are available
…”(5 October 1944, in Smith and Weiner 1980, 284). The California
offer did prompt Cornell, at Bethe’s urging, to raise Feynman’s salary

before he arrived. His “potential” salary was $3,000; when Berkeley
offered $3,900, Cornell agreed to $4,000. Bethe had written: “I know
that it is unusual to raise a man’s salary before he has even seen the
University at which he is employed. The justification, I believe, is given
by the unusual times and by the intimate knowledge that we here have
acquired of Feynman’s qualities.” Bethe to R. C. Gibbs, 24 July 1945,
and Gibbs to Feynman, 3 August 1945, CIT.

205 FEYNMAN BECAME THE FIRST OF THE GROUP LEADERS: Hawkins et al. 1983,

304.

205 IT WAS ON HIS LAST TRIP: WYD, 53.

CORNELL

Bethe provided access to his papers. Dyson shared copies of his
remarkable letters home during these years (my portrait of him relies on
these, on his various memoirs, on Brower 1978, and on Schweber,
forthcoming). Schwinger collected the key scientific texts (1958) and gave
his own rich perspective (1983). They and the other central figures in the
postwar development of quantum electrodynamics all provided their oral
recollections, as did Theodore Shultz, Michel Baranger, Evelyn Frank,
Arthur Wightman, Abraham Pais, and others. Paul Hartman (1984) shared
his entertaining history of 
the Cornell physics department and
correspondence with Feynman about space flight. My discussion of
scientific visualization is indebted to Arthur Miller 1984 and 1985, Bruce
Gregory 1988, Schweber 1986a, Park 1988, essays by (and a
conversation with) Gerald Holton, and Feynman’s own introspection. My
accounts of Feynman’s relationships with women, in this chapter and the
next, are based on correspondence in his personal papers and on my
interviews with each of the women whose relationships are described in
any detail; however, in the notes that follow, I usually omit individual
citations of these letters and interviews for reasons of privacy.

207 AMONG THE DIVINITIES: Charles Clayton Morrison, “The Atomic Bomb
and the Christian Faith,” The Christian Century, 13 March 1946, 330.

207 WHAT OPPENHEIMER PREACHED: Oppenheimer 1945, 316.
208 IT’S A TERRIBLE THING: SYJ, 118.

208 AND RIGHTLY SO: Oppenheimer 1945, 317.
208 WHEN YOU COME RIGHT DOWN TO IT: Ibid.
209 THE EVENTS OF THE PAST FEW YEARS: Truman, “Problems of Post-War

America,” 6 September 1945, in Vital Speeches 11(1945):23.
209 BEFORE THE WAR THE GOVERNMENT HAD PAID: Kevles 1987, 341.
209 THE QUIET TIMES WHEN PHYSICS: R. Wilson 1958, 145.
210 THE NATURE OF THE WORK: Oppenheimer 1945, 315–16.
210 IN THE FIRST, HE SAT DOWN: Hartman 1984, 202.
210 IN THE SECOND, TWO MONTHS AFTER HIROSHIMA: Bishop 1962, 560;

Hartman 1984, 238.

211 HE DEBARKED WITH A SINGLE SUITCASE: F-W, 415.
211 THE WEEK BEFORE FEYNMAN ARRIVED: Bishop 1962, 556.
211 HUGE RAKED PILES OF LEAVES: F-W, 417.
212 LOOK, BUDDY: Ibid., 419; cf. SYJ, 149–51.
212 SPEECH PATTERNS STRUCK HIM: “It was completely—like the nervousness
of working during the war. And this university in the backwoods … was
going at the typical university rate … he’s talking so slowly and batting
the breeze about the weather.” F-W, 418.

212 OUTSIDE, THREE TENNIS COURTS: Hartman 1984, 204–5.
212 MORRISON HAD BEEN LURED: Philip Morrison, interview, Cambridge,

Mass.

212 FEYNMAN DEPRESSED IS JUST A LITTLE MORE CHEERFUL: Quoted in
Schweber 1986a, 468; Feynman said, “I got deeper and deeper into a
kind of— I wouldn’t say depression, because I wasn’t depressed. I’m a
lively and happy fellow….” F-W, 425.
212 HE SPENT TIME IN THE LIBRARY: SYJ, 155.
212 HIS DANCE PARTNERS LOOKED ASKANCE: F-W, 423; SYJ, 154.
212 EVEN BEFORE LEAVING LOS ALAMOS: E.g. Olum, interview; Walker,
interview. One physicist’s wife said, “He exploded like a sexual
firecracker.”

213 NOW I WANT YOU TO KNOW: Lucille Feynman to Feynman, 17 June 1945,

PERS.

213 BEGGING HIM TO COME HOME: Lucille Feynman to Feynman, 21 June

1945, PERS.

213 THIS IS THE PRINCETON TRIANGLE: Lucille Feynman to Feynman, 8

August 1945, PERS.

213 I FELT THRILLED & FRIGHTENED: Ibid.
213 BY THE WAY: Ibid.
214 RICHARD, WHAT HAS HAPPENED: Lucille Feynman to Feynman, n.d.,

PERS.

215 HE PRIDED HIMSELF ON SPEAKING: Schwinger, interview. 215 A MAN

POSSESSED: Polkinghome 1989, 14.

215 I ABANDONED MY BACHELOR QUARTERS: Schwinger 1983, 332. 215 THEIR

FIRST ENCOUNTER: E.g., Crease and Mann 1986, 129.

215 ARE YOU A MOUSE OR A MAN? : Norman Ramsey and Rabi, quoted in
Schweber, forthcoming; Bernard T Feld, talk at Julian Schwinger’s 60th
birthday celebration, February 1978, AIR

216 EVEN BEFORE SCHWINGER GOT HIS COLLEGE DIPLOMA: Schweber,

forthcoming.

216 SCHWINGER MADE ONE TOUR: Schwinger, interview.
216 WHEN HE HAD LONG SINCE: Feynman 1978.
216 THE HARVARD COMMITTEE: Schweber, forthcoming.
217 PHENOMENA COMPLEX—LAWS SIMPLE: “Methods of Math Phys 405,”

Notebook, PERS.

218 WHETHER HE WOULD SUCCEED: Robert Walker, interview.
218 IN AN ATOM BOMB: “Methods of Math Phys 405.”
218 ANNOUNCER: LAST WEEK DR. FEYNMAN: “The Scientist Speaks,”

transcript, radio broadcast, WHCU, 26 April 1946, OPR

218 THE RAYS EMITTED: Ibid.
218 AT LOS ALAMOS HE HAD INVENTED: Hawkins et al. 1983, 308.
218 I BELIEVE THAT INTERPLANETARY TRAVEL : Feynman to Paul Hartman, 5

December 1945, PERS.
219 FLYING UPSIDE DOWN: Ibid.
220 HE RETURNED HOME AND OCCASIONALLY SNEAKED OUT: Joan Feynman,

interview.

220 ONE DAY FEYNMAN SAW HIM: F-L.
220 IT IS NOT SO EASY FOR A DOPE: Melville Feynman to Feynman, 10

September 1944, PERS.

220 THE DREAMS I HAVE OFTEN HAD: Ibid.
221 ON FEYNMAN’S FACE WAS A LOOK: Joan Feynman, interview.
221 CORNELL’S 1946 FALL-TERM ENROLLMENT: Bishop 1962, 555.
221 D‘ARLINE, I ADORE YOU: Feynman to Arline Feynman, 17 October 1947,

PERS.

223 FEYNMAN’S VERSION OF THE STORY: F-W, 620; SYJ, 137. The latter was
dictated more than twenty years later but sometimes tracks the first
version with uncanny, verbatim precision. The Selective Service files
were destroyed, as the FBI discovered in assembling its dossier on
Feynman. FOI.

226 FEYNMAN WAS INVITED: Princeton University 1946; F-W, 433–34; Wigner

1947; Feynman to Dirac, 23 July 1947, PERS.

226 DIRAC’S PAPER: Dirac 1946.
226 WE NEED AN INTUITIVE LEAP: Princeton University 1946, 15.
226 FEYNMAN LOOKED OUT THE WINDOW: F-W, 437.
226 HE HAD A QUESTION: Ibid., 272–73 and 437; Feynman 1948a, 378.
Feynman cared about this detail of historical priority. He later
emphasized it in his Nobel lecture: “I thought I was finding out what
Dirac meant, but, as a matter of fact, had made the discovery that what
Dirac thought was analogous, was, in fact, equal” (NL, 10). Schwinger,
however, in a tribute delivered at a memorial service to Feynman,
made a subtle point of dismissing the possibility that Dirac might not
have understood the implications of his paper: “Now, we know, and
Dirac surely knew, that to a constant factor the ‘correspondence’ … is
an equality…. Why, then, did Dirac not make a more precise, if less
general, statement? Because he was interested only in a general
question.” Schwinger 1989, 45.

226 OPPENHEIMER HAD INVITED HIM: Feynman to Oppenheimer, 5 November

1946, CIT

226 THE CHAIRMAN OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA’S PHYSICS DEPARTMENT:
G. P. Harnwell to Bethe, 25 February 1947, and Bethe to Harnwell, 4
March 1947, BET.

227 OPPENHEIMER HAD NOW BEEN NAMED: SYJ, 155; Smyth to Feynman, 23

October 1946 and 22 April 1947, CIT.

227 HE EXPERIMENTED WITH VARIOUS TACTICS: F-W, 426.
227 FOR A MOMENT HE FELT LIGHTER: Ibid., 427–28.
227 DON’T WORRY SO MUCH: SYJ, 156; F-W, 428.
227 A CORNELL CAFETERIA PLATE : F-W, 430; SYJ, 157. Also, Benjamin Fong
Chao, “Feynman’s Dining Hall Dynamics,” letter, Physics Today,
February 1989, 15.

228 WELTON WAS NOW WORKING: Welton, interview.
228 I AM ENGAGED NOW: Feynman to Welton, 10 February 1947, CIT.
228 I AM FEYNMAN: Pais 1986, 23.
229 SPIN WAS A PROBLEM: Schweber 1986a, 469.
229 NO WONDER HIS EYE: “Within a week, altogether, this question of the
rotation [of the plate] started me worrying about rotations, and then old
questions about the spinning electron, and how to represent it in the
path integrals and in the quantum mechanics, and I was in my work
again. It just opened the gate.” F-W, 430.
230 FEYNMAN DID NOT ATTEMPT TO PUBLISH: F-W, 444.
230 THE CHALLENGE WAS TO EXTEND: Ibid., 443; Schweber 1986a, 472.
232 THINKING 

I UNDERSTAND GEOMETRY: Feynman to Barbara Kyle, 20

October 1965, CIT.

232 THE LAST EIGHTEEN YEARS: K. K. Darrow diary, 14 April 1947, AIP.
232 THEORETICIANS WERE IN DISGRACE: Gell-Mann 1983a, 3.
232 THE THEORY OF ELEMENTARY PARTICLES: Weisskopf 1947.
233 SO TWO DOZEN SUIT-JACKETED PHYSICISTS: Schweber 1983, 313.
233 WHEN THEY GATHERED FOR BREAKFAST: Robert Marshak, telephone

interview.

233 IT IS DOUBTFUL IF THERE HAS EVER BEEN: Stephen White, “Top Physicists
Map Course at Shelter Island,” New York Herald Tribune, 3 June
1947, 23.

233 FEYNMAN TRIED HIS METHODS OUT: Pais 1986, 452.
234 A CLEAR VOICE, GREAT RUSH OF WORDS: K. K. Darrow diary, 14 April 1947,

AIP.

234 LAMB HAD GONE TO BED: Lamb 1980, 323.
234 TO SCHWINGER, LISTENING: Schwinger 1983, 337.
234 THE FACTS WERE INCREDIBLE: Quoted in Schweber, forthcoming.
234 AS THE MEETING ADJOURNED: Schwinger 1983, 332. Shortly afterward he
was married; or, as he put it, “I abandoned my bachelor quarters and
embarked on an accompanied, nostalgic trip around the country that
would occupy the whole summer.”
234 DEBACLE: Polkinghome 1989, 12.
235 IT WAS HARDLY A COMMON NAME: Morrison, interview.
235 WHAT THEY DID THERE: Michel Baranger, interview. New York.
235 I EXPECT HER TO BE: Alice Dyson, quoted in Schweber, forthcoming.

235 I, SIR PHILLIP ROBERTS: Sir Philip Roberts’s Erolunar Collision, in

Dyson 1992, 3–4.

236 HE READ POPULAR BOOKS: Dyson 1979, 12.
236 THAT SAME YEAR, FRUSTRATED: Schweber, forthcoming.
236 SHE CONTINUED BY TELLING HIM: Dyson 1979, 15.
236 AT CAMBRIDGE HE HEARD: Brower 1978, 16.
236 DYSON’S WAR: Dyson 1979, 19–21.
237 AMONG THE BOOKS: Ibid., 4.
237 MY WISH FOR SOMETHING TO SERVE: D. H. Lawrence, Study of Thomas

Hardy, quoted in Dyson 1988, 125.

237 THE NEWS OF HIROSHIMA: Brower 1978, 20.
237 YEARS LATER, WHEN DYSON: Ibid., 24.
238 BY HIS SOPHOMORE YEAR: Dyson 1987.
238 PROFESSOR LITTLEWOOD: Dyson 1944; Dyson, interview.
238 I AM LEAVING PHYSICS FOR MATHEMATICS: Kac 1985, xxiii; Dyson, interview.
238 HE PLAYED HIS FIRST GAME OF POKER: “… and found I was rather good at

it,” he wrote his parents, 11 June 1948.

238 HE EXPERIENCED THE AMERICAN FORM: Dyson to parents, 11 June 1948.
238 WE GO THROUGH SOME WILD COUNTRY: Dyson to parents, 19 November

1947.

239 HE HAS DEVELOPED A PRIVATE VERSION: Ibid.
239 HE TELEPHONED FEYNMAN: NL, 449.
239 IT WAS A BLUNT LOS ALAMOS-STYLE ESTIMATE: It diverged, but it only
diverged logarithmically, heading ever higher, but ever more slowly,
like the series 1 + ½ + 1/3 + ¼ + …—after a million terms this has not
even reached 15, but it never does stop rising. When the news
reached Russia, the great Lev Landau said with obscure Slavic
wisdom, “A chicken is not a bird, and a logarithm is not infinity.”
Weinberg 1977a, 30; Sakharov 1990, 84.
239 BUT THEY DID NOT COINCIDE: Bethe, interview.
240 KRAMERS PROPOSED A METHOD: Bethe had also talked with Schwinger
forms of

and Weis-skopf, both of whom had suggested 
renormalization.

240 DYSON COULD SEE: Dyson, interview.
241 ONE-MAN PERCUSSION BAND: Dyson to parents, 19 November 1947.
241 DID YOU KNOW THERE ARE TWICE AS MANY NUMBERS: Henry Bethe to

Gweneth, 17 February 1988, in WDY, 101.

241 FOR A WHILE, BECAUSE FEYNMAN: Dyson, interview. 241 HALF GENIUS AND

HALF BUFFOON: Dyson to parents, 8 March 1948.

241 FEYNMAN IS A MAN WHOSE IDEAS: Dyson to parents, 15 March 1948.
242 THE THOUGHT THAT THE LAWS OF THE MACROCOSMOS: Quoted in Miller

1984, 129.

242 WE ARE THEREFORE OBLIGED TO BE MODEST: Bohr 1922, 338.
242 JUST IMAGINE THE ROTATING ELECTRON: Quoted in Miller 1984, 143.
242 I UNDERSTAND THAT WHEN AN ATOM: WDY, 18–19.
244 IT IS WRONG TO THINK THAT THE TASK: Quoted in Gregory 1988, 185.
244 FEYNMAN SAID TO DYSON: Dyson 1979, 62.
244 A C ORNELL DORMITORY NEIGHBOR: Theodore Schultz, 

interview,

Yorktown Heights, NY.

244 SPACE IS A SWARMING IN THE EYES : Pencil note, CIT. Vladimir Nabokov,

Pale Fire (New York: Vintage, 1990), 40.

244 WHAT I AM REALLY TRYING TO DO: F-Sch.
245 WHEN I START DESCRIBING: Lectures, II-20–3.
245 AT ANY RATE DIAGRAMS HAD BEEN RARE: See Miller 1984.
246 WHEN HE FINALLY DID: Feynman 1948a.
247 HE STATED THE CENTRAL PRINCIPLE: Ibid., 367.
249 THE EDITORS NOW REJECTED THIS PAPER: Feynman and several other
people recalled this, although the journal has no record of it. E.g., F-W,
485; Baranger, interview.

249 THERE IS A PLEASURE: Feynman 1948a, 367.
249 HE LATER FELT THAT HE WAS BETTER KNOWN: Kac 1985, 115–16.
250 THE ELECTRON DOES ANYTHING: Quoted by Dyson in “Comment on the

Topic ‘Beyond the Black Hole,’” in Woolf 1980, 376.

250 FEYNMAN FELT THAT HE HAD UNCOVERED: Feynman 1948a, 377–78.
250 THE TREACHEROUSLY INNOCENT EXERCISES: See QED.
251 SEMIEMPIRICAL SHENANIGANS: NL, 451; F-W, 459.
251 HE PROMISED BETHE AN ANSWER: NL, 449; F-W, 459.
251 WHEN FEYNMAN HEARD LATE IN THE FALL: F-W, 462 f.
251 GOD IS GREAT: Rabi to Bethe, 2 December 1947, and Bethe to Rabi, 4

December 1947, BET. Quoted in Schweber, forthcoming.

2 5 2 THE SCHWINCER-WEISSKOPF-BETHE CAMP: Feynman to Corbens, 20

March 1948, CIT.

252 HIS LECTURE DREW A CROWD: “The Prodigy Who Grew,” Newsweek, 23
February 1948, 45–46; William L. Laurence, “New Guide Offered on
Atom Research,” New York Times, 1 February 1948; Stephen White,
“Physics Society Hears Theory of Electron Action,” New York Herald
Tribune, 1 February 1948, 51.
252 I DID IT TOO, DADDY: F-W, 463–64.
252 I’M SO SORRY: Rose McSherry to Feynman, 21 January, 1948, PERS.
253 MONTHS PASSED BEFORE FEYNMAN CALLED: Feynman 

formally
acknowledged the error in a footnote to a paper published the next
year; he juggled the footnotes so that the apology would fall in number
13: “That the result… was in error was repeatedly pointed out to the
author, in private communication, by V. F. Weisskopf and J. B.
French…. The author feels unhappily responsible for the very
considerable delay in the publication of French’s result occasioned by
this error.” Feynman 1949b, 777; Weisskopf, interview; Weisskopf
1991, 168.

253 A HOLE IF THERE WERE ONE: Dirac in Proceedings of the Royal Society

of London A 133(1931):60.

253 SUPPOSE A BLACK THREAD: Feynman 1948f 2–3.
254 A CORNELL STUDENT WHO HAD SERVED: Schweber 1986a, 488.
254 A BOMBARDIER WATCHING A SINGLE ROAD: Feynman 1948f, 4; cf. Feynman

1949a, 749.

254 HE KNEW FROM HIS OLD WORK: Feynman 1947, 1.
255 USUAL THEORY SAYS NO: Ibid., 4.
255 IT MAY PROVE USEFUL IN PHYSICS: Ibid.
256 FEYNMAN GLEEFULLY SAID: Marshak, interview. Instead these mesons

were named muon and pion, after Greek letters.
256 AS THE POCONO MEETING OPENED: Wheeler 1948.
256 EACH SMALL VOLUME OF SPACE: Ibid.
257 SCHWINGER HATED THIS: Schwinger, interview.
257 BETHE NOTICED THAT THE FORMAL MATHEMATICS : F-W, 469; Bethe,

interview.

257 FERMI, GLANCING ABOUT: Segrè 1970, 174.
257 THIS IS A MATHEMATICAL FORMULA: F-W, 470.
258 HE THOUGHT IT INTELLECTUALLY REPULSIVE: Schwinger, interview.
258 BOHR HAS RAISED THE QUESTION: Wheeler 1948.

258 BOHR CONTINUED FOR LONG MINUTES: F-W, 473; cf. Pais 1986, 459, but

this conflates Teller’s and Bohr’s objections.

258 I HAD TOO MUCH STUFF: F-Sch.
258 ON HIS FIRST DAY BACK: Arthur Wightman, interview, Princeton, N.J.
2 5 9 YOU CAN IMAGINE THAT I WAS HIGHLY PLEASED : Quoted in Schweber,

forthcoming. 259 ANONYMOUSLY, HE HOPED: Feynman 1948e, 9.

259 A MAJOR PORTION OF THE CONFERENCE: Ibid., 5.
259 WHEN SCHWINGER SAW FEYNMAN’S NAME: Schwinger 1983, 342.
260 TOMONAGA, A NATIVE OF TOKYO: Tomonaga 1966, 127–29.
260 AFTER SUPPER I TOOK UP MY PHYSICS: Quoted in Julian Schwinger, ‘Two

Shakers of Physics,” in Brown and Hoddeson 1983, 357–58.

260 HE MADE A HOME: Schweber, forthcoming.
261 JUST BECAUSE WE WERE ABLE: Oppenheimer to Members of the Pocono

Conference, 5 April 1948, OPP.

261 OTHER PEOPLE PUBLISH TO SHOW HOW: Dyson 1965a, 428.
261 SCHWINGER OCCASIONALLY HEARD: Schwinger 1983, 341.
261 I GATHER I STAND ACCUSED: Ibid.
261 ARE WE TALKING ABOUT PARTICLES: Schwinger, interview.
262 YOUR SUDDEN DEPARTURE FROM ITHACA: Lloyd P. Smith to Feynman, 13

June 1947, CIT.

263 FEYNMAN THOUGHT DYSON: WDY, 65.
263 DYSON LIKED THE ROLE: Dyson to parents, 25 June 1948.
263 HE HAD DECIDED THAT MODERN AMERICA: Dyson to parents, 14 June

1948.

263 AN ATOMIC BLAST ON EAST 20TH STREET: Morrison 1946; SYJ, 118.
264 DYSON SUDDENLY FELT THAT FEYNMAN : Dyson 1979, 59; Dyson to

parents, 25 June 1948.

264 AS WE DROVE THROUGH CLEVELAND: Dyson 1979, 60–61.
264 SOMETIMES IT OCCURRED TO HIM: F-W, 532.
264 DYSON HAD NEVER SEEN RAIN: Dyson 1979, 59.
264 THE CAR RADIO REPORTED: Dyson to parents, 25 June 1948.
264 THIS HOTEL IS UNDER NEW MANAGEMENT: WDY, 65.
265 IN THAT LITTLE ROOM: Dyson 1979, 59.
265 THE ROOM WAS FAIRLY CLEAN : WDY, 66. Dyson, far from taking offense,
merely commented that he had left out “the best part of the story.”
Dyson 1989, 38.

266 THAT STORMY NIGHT IN OUR LITTLE ROOM: Dyson 1979, 63.
266 ON WEDNESDAY OPPENHEIMER RETURNS: Dyson to parents, 10 October

1948, quoted in Schweber, forthcoming.

267 THERE WASN’T ENOUGH ROOM: Leonard Eyges to Dyson, quoted in

Schweber, forthcoming.

267 A UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT OF THE SUBJECT: Dyson 1949a, 486.
267 THERE IS THE FATHER INCOMPREHENSIBLE: Dyson 1989, 35–36.
267 ANY MODERATELY INTELLIGIBLE ACCOUNT : Dyson to parents, 4 October

1948.

267 SO THE RESULT OF ALL THIS: Ibid.
268 THEIR EVALUATION GIVES RISE: Dyson 1949a, 491.
268 WRITE DOWN THE MATRIX ELEMENTS: Ibid., 495.
268 IT WAS “SCHWINGER’S THEORY": Oppenheimer 1948.
269 DEAR FREEMAN: I HOPE YOU DID NOT GO BRAGGING: Feynman to Dyson, 29

October 1948, CIT.

270 WELL, DOC, YOU’RE IN: Dyson to parents, quoted in Schweber,

forthcoming.

270 FEYNMAN HAD NOT LEARNED: NL, 452.
271 HE BUTTONHOLED SLOTNICK: F-W, 489–92.; NL, 452; F-Sch; Schweber,

forthcoming.

271 WHAT ABOUT SLOTNICK’S CALCULATION?: Later Case sent Feynman his
manuscript, and Feynman found an algebraic error that undermined the
proof. F-W, 495–96.

271 THERE WERE VISIONS AT LARGE: Schwinger 1983, 343.
272 THE REST MASS PARTICLES HAVE: Feynman 1948b, 943.
272 FEYNMAN AND I REALLY UNDERSTAND EACH OTHER: Dyson to parents, 1

November 1948.

272 FEYNMAN’S STUDENTS, HOWEVER, SOMETIMES NOTICED: Baranger,

interview.

272 HE HAD STARTED HEARING ABOUT DYSON GRAPHS: Cf. F-W, 501.
272 WENTZEL HIMSELF: Crease and Mann 1986, 143.
273 FEYNMAN STRESSED HOW FREE: Feynman 1949b, 773.
275 FOR A WHILE IT WAS ALL SCHWINGER: F-W, 499.
275 IN THE SUMMER OF 1950: J. Ashkin, T. Auerbach, and R. Marshak,
“Notes on a Possible Annihilation Process for Negative Protons,”
Physical Review 79(1950):266.

275 A TECHNIQUE DUE TO FEYNMAN: K. A. Brueckner, “The Production of

Mesons by Photons,” Physical Review 79(1950):641.

275 THE UNREASONABLE POWER OF THE DIAGRAMS: Segrè 1980, 274.
276 LIKE THE SILICON CHIP: Schwinger 1983, 343. 276 PEDAGOGY, NOT

PHYSICS: Ibid., 347.

276 YES, ONE CAN ANALYZE EXPERIENCE: Ibid., 343.
277 ALTHOUGH ‘ONE’ IS NOT PERFECTLY: Bernstein 1987, 63.
277 THEY ALSO WORRIED ABOUT SCHWINCER’S ABILITY: Sheldon Glashow,

interview, Cambridge, Mass.

277 MURRAY GELL-MANN LATER SPENT A SEMESTER : Murray Gell-Mann,

interviews, Pasadena and Chicago.

278 THERE WAS A NEW NOTE : E.g., Virginia Prewett, “I Homesteaded in
Brazil,” Saturday Evening Post, 22 April 1950, 10, began, “It’s going to
be the first atomic-bomb shelter in the New World.” Cf. F-W, 551.
278 AT LEAST A 40 PERCENT CHANCE OF WAR : Wheeler to Feynman, 29 March

1951, CIT.

278 WHEN A BRAZILIAN PHYSICIST: Lopes 1988; J. Leite Lopes, personal

communication.

278 LATE THE NEXT WINTER HE IMPULSIVELY ASKED : Jayme Tiomno to
Feynman, 6 March 1950, PERS. The Brazilians replied that a one-year
appointment was the best they could offer at the time.

278 HE HAD ENDURED ONE TOO MANY DAYS: F-W, 546; Bacher, interview.
278 ALL THE INS AND OUTS: Feynman to Bacher, 6 April 1950, PERS.
278 I DO NOT LIKE TO SUGGEST: Ibid.
279 ONCE (AND IT WAS NOT YESTERDAY): Cvitanoviç 1983, 6.

CALTECH

Three local histories are Judith Goodstein’s Millikan’s School, Ann
Scheid’s Pasadena: Crown of the Valley, and Kevin Starr’s Inventing the
Dream; they were useful background, as was Robert Kargon’s essay
‘Temple to Science.” I’ve also relied on the recollections of many present
and former Caltech professors, students, and administrators. Some
information on Feynman’s time in Brazil comes from the recollections of
José Leite Lopes (1988 and personal communication), Cecile DewittMorette, and others; from Feynman’s 1951 correspondence with Fermi;

from Brownell 1952; from Feynman’s talk “The Problem of Teaching
Physics in Latin America” (1963a), and from publications of the Centra
Brasileiro de Pesquisas Fisicas. Documentation of the government’s
secret scrutiny of Feynman and of his consultation with the State
Department on the advisability of travel to the Soviet Union came through
my Freedom of Information Act requests to the FBI, CIA, Department of the
Army, and Department of Energy in 1988 and 1989. Some of the State
Department correspondence is also in CIT. On superfluidity, Robert
Schrieffer, Hans Bethe, Michael Fisher, and Russell Donnelly were
especially helpful. Donnelly sent written reminiscences by several
colleagues. Andronikashvili 1990 is a remarkable memoir from the
Russian perspective. For the particle physics of the 1950s and 1960s: the
Rochester conference proceedings; John Polkinghorne’s witty memoir
(1989) and Jeremy Bernstein’s “informal history” (1989); Robert Marshak’s
account 
(1970); Brown, Dresden, and Hoddeson’s symposium
proceedings Pions to Quarks: Particle Physics in the 1950s; and
interviews with the various scientists cited. Again, some material on
personal relationships is based on letters and interviews that I cannot cite
specifically for reasons of privacy. Feynman’s thinking on gravitation can
be seen in a fifteen-page letter to Victor Weisskopf written in January and
February 1961 (WHE) and in his Faraday lecture (1961b), as well as his
one published paper (1965b) and various lecture notes in CIT. The
development of quarks and partons has been well chronicled from different
points of view by Andrew Pickering (1984) and Michael Riordan (1987);
Feynman kept his notes from this period in unusually good order (CIT);
Riordan and Burton Richter provided useful on-site guidance at the
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center; James Bjorken, George Zweig,
Sidney Drell, Yung-Su Tsai, and, of course, Murray Gell-Mann were among
those with especially helpful reminiscences. For the record of Feynman’s
illnesses I relied on notes and correspondence in his files and interviews
with Drs. C. M. Haskell, William C. Bradley, and In Chang Kim. For the
investigation into the Challenger accident: the hearing transcripts and
documentation as published in the commission report; Feynman’s
personal notes and commission memorandums (CIT and PERS); Ralph
Leighton’s unedited transcript of Feynman’s oral account (later published
in WDY); interviews with commissioners, NASA officials and engineers,

and others (only William P. Rogers refused to make himself available,
despite my repeated requests for an interview). Carl Feynman shared the
manuscript of the paper Feynman was working on until he entered the
hospital for the last time.

281 THE CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY: J. Goodstein 1991, 180.
281 PASADENA IS TEN MILES FROM LOS ANGELES: Morrow Mayo, quoted in

Scheid 1986, 156.

2 8 1 EVERY LUNCHEON, EVERY DINNER: Letter to the Editor, Los Angeles

Times, 6 March 31, quoted in J. Goodstein 1991, 100.
282 COULD IT BE THAT NITROGEN HAS TWO LEVELS: F-W, 559.
282 DEAR FERMI: Feynman to Enrico Fermi, 19 December 1951; Fermi to
Feynman, 18 January 1952 and 28 April 1952, AIR Some of
Feynman’s meson work that year emerges in Lopes and Feynman
1952.

282 DON’T BELIEVE ANY CALCULATION: Feynman to Fermi, 19 December

1951.

283 IN RECENT YEARS SEVERAL NEW PARTICLES: Fermi and Yang 1949, 1739.
2 8 3 HE COULD SPEND DAYS AT THE BEACH : Lopes, personal
communication.

283 I WISH I COULD ALSO REFRESH: Fermi to Feynman, 18 January 1952, AIR
283 FEYNMAN TAUGHT BASIC ELECTROMAGNETISM: Feynman 1963a.
284 LIGHT IMPINGING ON A MATERIAL: Ibid., 26.
284 BUT WHEN HE ASKED WHAT WOULD HAPPEN: SYJ, 192.
284 THEY COULD DEFINE “TRIBOLUMINESCENCE": Even in his sixties he
continued to consider ways of intensifying this phenomenon in the
substances he described as “WL (Wint-o-green Lifesavers) and S
(sucrose).” Feynman to J. Thomas Dick-enson, 13 May 1985, CIT.

284 HAVE YOU GOT SCIENCE?: SYJ, 197.
284 WHAT ARE THE FOUR TYPES OF TELESCOPE?: Feynman 1963a, 24.
284 HE WOULD SIT IDLY AT A CAFÉ TABLE: Joan Feynman, interview.
284 GIVES A FEELING OF STABILITY: Feynman 1963a, 24.
285 PHILIP MORRISON, WHO SHARED AN OFFICE: Morrison, interview.
286 HE JOINED A LOCAL SCHOOL: SYJ, 185.
286 IN THE 1952 CARNEVAL: Lopes, personal communication.
287 HE HEARD FROM HARDLY ANYONE: F-W, 564; Feynman to Oppenheimer,

27 May 1952, OPR

287 HE HAUNTED THE MIRAMAR HOTEL’S OUTDOOR PATIO BAR : Bertram J.

Collcutt to Feynman, 2 December 1985, CIT.

287 HE TOOK OUT PAN AMERICAN STEWARDESSES: SYJ, 183–84.
287 THE OLD CERTAINTIES OF THE PAST: Mead 1949, 4.
289 TELL ME WHAT IT IS LIKE: Michels 1948, 16.
290 It SEEMS TO ME THAT YOU GO TO LOTS OF TROUBLE: Feynman, note, n.d.,

PERS.

290 HOW IS IT POSSIBLE: SYJ, 168.
290 YOU ARE WORSE THAN A WHORE: Ibid., 169–70.
292 EVEN BEFORE THEY MARRIED, THEY QUARRELED: Mary Louise Bell to

Feynman, 30 May 1950 and 24 March 1952, PERS.

292 THE PATTERN IS THAT THE GIRL : Bell to Feynman, 26 February 1952,

PERS.

292 THEY HONEYMOONED IN MEXICO: SYJ, 286.
292 SHE DID NOT KNOW WHAT TO THINK: Mary Louise Bell, telephone

interview.

292 SHE LIKED TO TELL PEOPLE: Bell, interview.
292 WHERE THERE’S SMOKE THERE’S FIRE: Gell-Mann, interview.
2 9 3 HAS WILFULLY, WRONGFULLY : Complaint for Divorce, 6 June 1956,
Superior Court, Los Angeles County. “Final Adjustment of Property
Settlement,” handwritten agreement, 16 October 1956, PERS.

293 THE DRUMS MADE TERRIFIC NOISE: “Beat Goes Sour: Calculus and African

Drums

Bring Divorce,” Los Angeles Times, 18 July 1956.
293 BEGGING FOR HIS OLD JOB BACK: Feynman to Bethe, 26 November 1954,

BET.

293 SOON AFTERWARD, SOMEONE RUSHED UP: SYJ, 211–12.
293 MEANWHILE, ALTHOUGH BETHE HAD BEEN THRILLED: Bethe to Feynman, 3

December 1954, BET.

294 THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO DECIDED: Goldberger, interview; SYJ, 213.
295 A HOST OF APPLIED SCIENCES: Cf. Forman 1987 and Kevles 1990.
295 WHEN SCIENCE IS ALLOWED TO EXIST: DuBridge, quoted in Forman 1987.
295 THESE WERE NOT SO MUCH CRUMBS: As the leading experimentalist Luis
Alvarez told the physicist and historian Abraham Pais: “Right after the
war we had a blank check from the military because we had been so

successful. Had it been otherwise we would have been villains. As it
was we never had to worry about money.” Pais 1986, 19.

295 IN 1954 THE SECRETARY OF THE ARMY: Minutes of Executive Session,
Army Scientific Advisory Panel, 17 November 1954, CIT; F-W, 599–
601.

295 HOT DOC: Feynman to Lucille Feynman, n.d., PERS.
295 THE PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENT CAME: “Einstein Award to Professor, 35,”

New York Times, 14 March 1954; F-W, 673.

296 THE AEC BEGAN FOUR WEEKS OF HEARINGS: Atomic Energy Commission

1954.

296 YOU SHOULD NEVER TURN A MAN’S GENEROSITY: A decade later, he was
uncomfortable with his decision. “I knew what had happened to
Oppenheimer, and that Strauss had something to do with it, and I didn’t
like it…. O.K.? And I thought—I’m going to fix him. I mean, I was not
nice. I don’t want to take it from him. The hell with it. And I thought:
maybe I won’t take the prize. All right? And I worried about it, because
in a certain sense I felt that was unfair. The guy is offering the money—
you know, he’s trying to do something nice— and it isn’t that he just did
it because of this, because he’s done it before. There were previous
Einstein Awards, as far as I know, or something…. I was kind of
confused. “F-W, 673–74.

296 FEYNMAN’S OWN FILE AT THE FBI: 497 pages, partly expurgated, FOI.
296 PROFESSOR FEYNMAN IS ONE OF THE LEADING: Bethe to M. Evelyn
Michaud, 7 April 1950, and Michaud to Bethe, 27 March 1950, BET.

297 ONE OF ITS PRINCIPAL ARCHITECTS: Sakharov 1990, 190–91.
298 I THOUGHT YOU WOULD BE INTERESTED: Feynman to Atomic Energy
Commission, 14 January 1955, CIT. Also: “Is there danger that I would
be kept there and not return?” Feynman to State Department, 14
January 1955, FOI.

298 PROPAGANDA GAINS: Walter J. Stoessel, Jr., “Invitation to United States
Physicist to Attend Scientific Conference,” confidential memorandum,
Department of State, 21 January 1955, FOI; Stoessel, Jr., to Feynman,
15 March 1955, CIT.

298 CIRCUMSTANCES HAVE ARISEN: Feynman to A. N. Nesmeyarrov, 14 March

1955, CIT.

298 THIS IS A CLEAR CASE: “Scientist at Caltech Warned,” Los Angeles

Times, 8 April 1955.

299 WHEN FEYNMAN TALKED ABOUT FLUID FLOW: Lectures, II-40–1.
299 THEORISTS OF “DRY WATER": Lectures, II-40–3 and III-4–12.
300 TWO CITIES UNDER SIEGE: Feynman 1957a, 205.
300 NORWEGIAN I AND NORWEGIAN II: Donnelly 1991b.
300 THE MOST BASIC CLUE: Feynman 1955b, 18.
301 THE SPEAKERS HAD NO IDEA: Russell Donnelly, telephone interview.
301 HE HAD TRIED TO PICTURE: Feynman 1953c, 1302.
302 THE CHALLENGE WAS TO DRIVE: “The hardest part of the helium problem
was done by physical reasoning alone, without being able to write
anything…. it was very very interesting to be able to push through that
doggoned thing without having stuff to write.” F-W, 739.

301 HE LAY AWAKE IN BED: F-W, 693–95.
302 THE RINGS OF ATOMS WERE LIKE RINGS OF CHILDREN: Feynman 1958a, 21.
302 TYPICAL FEYNMAN: Donnelly, interview.
303 POSSIBLY I UNDERSTAND: Note, “Possibly I understand …” n.d., CIT.
303 THE YEAR BEFORE, SCHRIEFFER HAD LISTENED: Robert Schrieffer,

telephone interview; Feynman 1957a.
303 WE HAVE NO EXCUSE: Feynman 1957a, 212.
304 BY THE FIRST OF THESE MEETINGS: Pais 1986, 461; Polkinghorne 1989,

20.

304 WITHIN A FEW YEARS PARTICLE TABULATIONS: Polkinghorne 1989, 21.
304 GENTLEMEN, WE HAVE BEEN INVADED: C. F. Powell, at a 1953 conference,

quoted in Polkinghorne 1989, 48.

305 ONE EXPERIMENTALIST, MARCEL SCHEIN: Crease and Mann 1986, 178.
305 You have a different theory: F-W, 603–5.
306 If a Caltech experimenter: Barry Barish, interview, Pasadena.
307 HE THOUGHT PAIS WAS WRONG: Cell-Mann 1982, 399.
307 AT FOURTEEN HE HAD BEEN DECLARED: Columbiana 1944 (Columbia

Grammar and Preparatory School), 28; Bernstein 1987, 20.

308 THE ONLY PERSON WHO WILL KNOW: Ralph Leighton, interview,

Pasadena.

308 IT WAS THE CLOSEST TO SUCCESS: Cell-Mann, interview.
308 IT WAS HIS BROTHER: Gell-Mann 1989b, 3.
309 WHEN WEISSKOPF ADVISED HIM: Gell-Mann, interview.
309 FEYNMAN FELT A FLICKER OF ENVY: F-W, 670; SYJ, 223.

309 GELL-MANN, IN CHICAGO, FELT EVEN MORE: “Jealousy was another reason
… I resented the publicity being given to the scheme of Pais, which I
was convinced was wrong!” Gell-Mann 1982, 399.

310 THE EDITORS OF THE PHYSICAL REVIEW: Gell-Mann 1953; Gell-Mann

1982, 400.

310 WHY SHOULD A BROAD-MINDED THEORIST: Quoted in Polkinghorne 1989,
49. Similarly, the historian ). L. Heilbron: “‘Strangeness,’ a word barely
utterable in Romance languages and expressive of a surprise only
briefly felt…. Does the new terminology express cynicism or disdain by
particle theorists toward their own creations?” “An Historian’s Interest
in Particle Physics,” in Brown et al. 1989, 53.
310 THE WINTER FERMI DIED: Gell-Mann, interview.
311 MOST OF HIS BODY WAS CREMATED: Thomas S. Harvey, telephone
interview; William L. Laurence, “Key Clue Sought in Einstein Brain,”
N e w York Times, 20 April 1955; Steven Levy, “My Search for
Einstein’s Brain,” New Jersey Monthly, August 1978, 43.
311 VARIOUS NINETEENTH-CENTURY RESEARCHERS: Could 1981.
312 IS THERE A NEUROLOGICAL SUBSTRATE: Obler and Fein 1988, 6.
313 ENLIGHTENED, PENETRATING, AND CAPACIOUS MINDS: Duff 1767, 5.
313 RAMBLING AND VOLATILE POWER: Ibid., 9.
313 IMAGINATION IS THAT FACULTY: Ibid., 6–7.
314 IN POINT OF GENIUS: Gerard 1774, 13.
314 A QUESTION OF VERY DIFFICULT SOLUTION: Ibid., 18.
315 IT IS ONE OF THE HOPES: Quoted in Root-Bernstein 1989, 1.
315 A PHYSICIST STUDYING QUANTUM FIELD THEORY: Coleman, interview.
315 FROM GEOMETRY TO LOGARITHMS: Hood 1851, 10–11.
316 THE ASTROPHYSICIST WILLY FOWLER: Thorne, interview; Fowler, interview
conducted by Charles Weiner, 30 May 1974, AIP: “I just thought
Feynman’s talking through his hat, what can he possibly mean, what
can general relativity have to do with these objects?”

316 THAT FEYNMAN HAD SIGNED: John S. Rigden, interview, New York.
317 WHY DO I CALL HIM A MAGICIAN?: Quoted in Dyson 1979, 8–9.
317 MAGICAL MUMBO-JUMBO: Dyson 1979, 8.
318 BETWEEN THE PHYSIOLOGY OF THE MAN: Lombroso 1891, xiii.
319 LET EUROPEAN ROMANTICS CELEBRATE: Currie 1974.
319 I SPEAK WITHOUT EXAGGERATION: Quoted in Grartan 1933, 156.

319 MR. EDISON IS NOT A WIZARD: Quoted in LaFollette 1990, 97.
320 EDISON WAS NOT A WIZARD: Grartan 1933, 151.
320 HONEST CRAFTSMEN: Dyson 1979, 9.
321 HE WAS SEARCHING FOR GENERAL PRINCIPLES: Ibid., 62–63.
321 SO WHAT IS THIS MIND OF OURS?: WDY, 220.
322 KNOWING WHAT FERMI COULD DO: Zuckerman 1977.
323 I THINK IF HE HAD NOT BEEN SO QUICK: Coleman, interview.
324 THE WHOLE QUESTION OF IMAGINATION: Lectures, II-20–10.
325 NOT JUST SOME HAPPY THOUGHTS: Ibid.
325 OUR IMAGINATION IS STRETCHED: CPL, 127–28.
325 WE KNOW SO VERY MUCH: Feynman to Welton, 10 February 1947, CIT
326 THERE ARE SO VERY FEW EQUATIONS: Ibid.
326 MAYBE THAT’S WHY YOUNG PEOPLE: Feynman 1965c.
326 WELTON, TOO, WAS PERSUADED: Welton, interview: “I said, ‘Dick, think in
retrospect what would have happened if I had taught you the Q.E.D.
that I knew— you would have known too much, and you wouldn’t have
been able to innovate as much,’ and he said, ‘You’re right.’”

326 WOULD I HAD PHRASES: Attributed to Khakheperressenb, quoted in

Lentricchia 1980, 318.

326 THERE ARE NO LARGE PEOPLE: Quoted by Scott Spencer, “The Old Man
and the Novel,” New York Times Magazine, 22 September 1991, 47.
327 GIANTS HAVE NOT CEDED: Gould 1983, 224. 329 THOSE COUNTLESS

FOOTNOTES: Merton 1961, 72.

329 I ALWAYS FIND QUESTIONS LIKE THAT : Feynman to James T. Cushing, 21

October 1985, CIT.

330 WEISSKOPF DECLARED AT ONE MEETING: Polkinghorne 1989, 61.
331 FEYNMAN HIMSELF CONFESSED: Millard Susman, personal

communication, 29 May 1989.

331 EVERYTHING’S REALLY ALL RIGHT : Untitled videotape, n.d., recorded for

the British Broadcasting Corporation; cf. Gardner 1969, 22–23.

331 CHEMISTS CAN MAKE THEM WITH EITHER HANDEDNESS: Feynman 1965e,

98–100.

332 GELL-MANN SPENT A LONG WEEKEND: Gell-Mann, interview.
332 BY THE TIME THE 1956 ROCHESTER CONFERENCE: Pais 1986, 524.
333 BE IT RECORDED HERE THAT ON THE TRAIN: Ibid., 525.
333 AN EXPERIMENTER ASKED FEYNMAN WHAT ODDS: “I mention this story

because I was prejudiced against thinking that parity wasn’t conserved,
but I knew it might not be. In other words, I couldn’t bet one hundred to
one, but just fifty to one.” F-W, 721.

333 PURSUING THE OPEN-MIND APPROACH: Ballam et al. 1956, 27.
333 SOME STRANGE SPACE-TIME: Ibid., 28.
333 THE CHAIRMAN: Ibid.
334 I DO NOT BELIEVE THAT THE LORD: Quoted in Bernstein 1967, 59–60.
334 WE ARE NO LONGER TRYING TO HANDLE SCREWS: Sheldon Penman, quoted

in Gardner 1969, 244.

334 AT THE 1957 ROCHESTER CONFERENCE: Polkinghorne 1989, 65.
334 BUSY EXPLAINING THAT THEY PERSONALLY: Ibid., 64–65.
335 HE REFUSED TO REFEREE PAPERS: “To me there’s an infinite amount of
work involved…. I’m not built that way. I can’t think his way. I can’t follow
and try to go through all these steps. If I want to worry about the
problem, I read the paper to get the problem, and then maybe work it
out some other way…. Now, to read and just check steps is— I can’t
do.” F-W, 715.

335 MR. BEARD IS VERY COURAGEOUS: Feynman to Theodore Caris, 5

December 1961, CIT.

335 YOU’VE DONE IT AGAIN AND AGAIN,: F-W, 727–28; Joan Feynman.
336 AS LEE POINTED OUT: In Ascoli et al. 1957.
336 IN READING LEE AND YANG’S PREPRINT: F-W, 724.
336 HE LIKED THE IDEA ENOUGH: F-W, 725–26; SYJ, 228.
336 A TWO-COMPONENT EQUATION:

336 SUPPOSE THAT HISTORICALLY: Feynman 1957b, 43.
337 OF COURSE I CAN’T DO THAT: Ibid.
337 MARSHAK AND SUDARSHAN MET WITH GELL-MANN: An unhappy tangle of
priority concerns followed. Marshak and Sudarshan were concerned to

point out that Gell-Mann had learned of their work in progress in July;
Gell-Mann was concerned to point out that he had been thinking about
V-A “for all these years.” Marshak and Sudarshan had missed the
opportunity to speak at the Rochester meeting in April—when
Feynman described his two-component Dirac equation—and forever
after found themselves rehearsing their reasons for remaining silent.
To their deep dismay, most physicists cited the Feynman-Gell-Mann
paper, not the Marshak-Sudarshan paper (Sudarshan 1983, 486;
Sudarshan and Marshak 1984, 15–20). They liked to quote a generous
remark of Feynman’s long afterward: “We have a conventional theory
of weak interactions invented by Marshak and Sudarshan, published
by Feynman and Gell-Mann, and completed by Cabibbo….” Feynman
1974b.

337 I FLEW OUT OF THE CHAIR: F-W, 729–30.
337 GELL-MANN, HOWEVER, DECIDED: Gell-Mann, interview.
338 BEFORE THE TENSION BETWEEN THEM: Gell-Mann, Bacher, interviews.
338 COLLEAGUES STRAINED TO OVERHEAR: Matthew Sands, interview, Santa

Cruz, Calif.

338 GELL-MANN SOMETIMES DISDAINED IT: Gell-Mann 1983b; Gell-Mann,
interview: “He wrote his version using a two-component formalism, of
which he was very proud. I disliked the approach: I found it clumsy and
unnecessary. I added a lot of material to the paper, some good and
some bad, but I didn’t succeed in changing the emphasis on the twocomponent formalism. That was sort of unfortunate.”

338 ONE OF THE AUTHORS HAS ALWAYS: Feynman and Gell-Mann 1958a, 194.
338 HAS A CERTAIN AMOUNT OF THEORETICAL: Ibid., 193.
338 THERE WAS A MOMENT WHEN I KNEW: Edson 1967, 64.
339 WE ARE WELL AWARE OF THE FRAGILITY: Feynman and Gell-Mann 1958b.
339 IMPRESSING LISTENERS WITH THE BODY LANGUAGE: Polkinghorne 1989, 72.
339 YOU SPEAK ENGLISH: Gweneth Feynman, interview.
340 FEYNMAN ARRIVED AT A PICNIC: Susman, personal communication.
340 A NEW ERA IN HISTORY: “Red Moon over U.S.,” Time, 14 October 1957,

27.

340 ALL THE MASTERY THAT IT IMPLIES: “The Red Conquest,” Newsweek, 14

October 1957, 38.

340 WELL, LET’S GET THIS STRAIGHT: Quoted in “The Feat That Shook the

Earth,” Life, 21 October 1957, 25.
340 OUR WAY OF LIFE IS DOOMED: Ibid., 23.
340 CURLY-HAIRED AND HANDSOME : “Bright Spectrurn,” Time, 18 November

1957, 24.

341 SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL LEADERSHIP 

IS SLIPPING: “In Science,”

Newsweek, 20 January 1958, 65.

341 THEY WILL ADVANCE SO FAST: “Knowledge Is Power,” Time, 18 November

1957, 21.

341 NO TIME FOR HYSTERIA: Reader’s Digest, December 1957, 117.
3 4 1 A STATE DEPARTMENT OFFICIAL LET CALTECH KNOW: Feynman: “…
someone from the State Department asked that Murray’s name be on
it also, in order to impress. This was very unfortunate altogether. I don’t
mind Murray’s name on it, that’s not the point, but this kind of crap.
They call up—so many Russians are going to talk about this thing, they
have to have more Americans talking about something scientific … this
stuff about propaganda mixing up with the science, you know.” F-W,
744.

341 IT REMINDED HIM OF THE FLOPHOUSES: WDY, 63–65.
341 SHE TOLD HIM SHE WAS MAKING HER WAY: Gweneth Feynman, interview.
342 I’VE DECIDED TO STAY HERE: Gweneth Howarth to Feynman, 13 October

1958, PERS.

343 HE CONSULTED A LAWYER: Sands, interview.
343 FEYNMAN CALCULATED FARES: Gweneth Howarth to Feynman, 1

November 1958, PERS.

343 YOU’LL WRITE & TELL ME: Gweneth Howarth to Feynman, 1 December

1958, PERS.

343 I’M IMPROVING, AM I NOT: Gweneth Howarth to Feynman, 2 January 1959,

PERS.

344 YOU DO NEED SOMEONE: Gweneth Howarth to Feynman, 14 January
1959, PERS. 344 SHE IS AN INTELLIGENT GIRL: Feynman to American
Consulate General, Zurich, 22 January 1959, PERS.

344 SHE HAD TO AVOID ENGELBERT: Gweneth Howarth to Feynman, 14

February 1959.

344 FROM WHAT MORAL HIGH GROUND: Gweneth Feynman, interview.
345 BUT FEYNMAN’S ATTORNEYS ADVISED HIM: Samuel C. Klein to Robert F.
Diekman, 22 September 1959, and Robert F. Diekman to Feynman,

30 September 1959, PERS.

345 WELL, AT LAST: Feynman to Gweneth Howarth, 28 May 1959, PERS.
345 SHE SURREPTITIOUSLY INTRODUCED COLORED SHIRTS: Gweneth Feynman,

interview.

346 AT FIRST HE KEPT HER PRESENCE SECRET: Gweneth Feynman, Gell-Mann,

interviews.

346 SO THIS IS HOW WE’RE STARTING LIFE: Gweneth Feynman, interview.
346 MURRAY GELL-MANN, WHO HAD MARRIED: Gell-Mann 1989a, 50.
346 AN IMAGE LODGED IN GELL-MANN’S MEMORY: Ibid.
347 HELLO, MY SWEETHEART: Feynman to Gweneth Feynman, 11 October

1961, PERS.

347 AGE IS, OF COURSE, A FEVER CHILL: E.g. Kragh 1989, 347n.
348 TO CONVEY A SENSE OF HOW “DELICATELY": QED, 7.
348 WE HAVE BEEN COMPUTING TERMS: Feynman 1961a, 17.
348 NOTE THE CUNNING OF REASON AT WORK: Schweber, forthcoming.
348 WE VERY MUCH NEED A GUIDING PRINCIPLE: Weinberg 1977a, 33.
348 “DIPPY” AND “A SHELL GAME": QED, 128.
349 THE ELECTRON DISTORTS THE LATTICE: Feynman 1955a; Feynman et al.

1962.

349 HIS CALTECH SALARY: Salary records, Lee DuBridge papers, CIT.
349 HE STARTED TELLING PEOPLE: Susman, personal communication.
349 FEYNMAN TOLD HIMSELF THAT HE WOULD GO: F-W, 751.
349 FEYNMAN BEGAN IN THE SUMMER: Notebook, “Biochemical Techniques,”

CIT; F-W, 751.

350 UNDERSTANDING WHEN A THING IS REALLY KNOWN: F-W, 753.
350 HE FOCUSED ON A PARTICULAR MUTATION : Benzer 1962; Crick 1962; Crick

1966.

350 FEYNMAN COMPARED FINDING: Susman, personal communication.
350 FRIENDS OF HIS IN THE LABORATORY: Robert Sinsheimer to Feynman, n.d.,
“Dear Feyntron … ,” CIT; “Mutual Suppression of rII Mutants of
Bacteriophage T4D,” draft by Robert Sinsheimer, CIT. F-W, 752: “I
knew they were very interesting and unusual, but I didn’t write it up.” He
did contribute to a group paper in Genetics, however: Edgar,
Feynman, et al. 1961.

351 THE SPECIALISTS HAD AN ADVANTAGE: Crick et al. 1961; Crick 1962.
351 THE STORY OF THE GENETIC CODE: Crick 1966, 55–56.

351 QUANTUM-MECHANICAL SMEARING OF SPACE-TIME: Gell-Mann 1989a, 53.
352 THE GRAVITATIONAL FORCE IS WEAK : Alexander J. Glass, letter to Physics

Today, May 1988, 136.

352 I HAVE NOT SEEN ANY PLANS: Feynman to Weisskopf, 4 January to 11

February 1961, WHE.
352 MAYBE GRAVITY IS A WAY: Ibid.
352 A CONFERENCE ON GRAVITATION: Feynman 1963b.
353 SINCE 1916 WE HAVE HAD A SLOW: Quoted in Schucking 1990, 486.
353 THEY TEASED EACH OTHER: Feynman to Gweneth Feynman, n.d., in

WDY, 90.

353 WHAT HAVE YOU EVER DONE: Schucking 1990, 483.
353 THE “WORK” IS ALWAYS : Feynman to Gweneth Feynman, n.d., in WDY,

91–92.

354 THE REAL FOUNDATION OF QUANTUM MECHANICS: Gell-Mann 1989a, 54.
354 THERE IS A DEVICE ON THE MARKET: Feynman 1960a, 22–24.
355 HE ENVISIONED MACHINES THAT WOULD MAKE: The idea of ever-tinier servocontrolled robotic hands had been anticipated by the science fiction
writer Robert Heinlein, who called them Waldoes. Cf. Regis 1990, 142.
355 HOW TO BUILD AN AUTOMOBILE: Popular Science Monthly, November

1960, 114.

356 NOT UNTIL 1985 DID FEYNMAN HAVE TO PAY: Thomas H. Newman to

Feynman, 30 January 1986, CIT.

356 BY JUNE, WHEN HE HAD NOT HEARD: William McLellan, telephone

interview; “McLellan Micromotor,” note, CIT.

356 UH-OH: McLellan, interview.
356 HE HAD NEGLECTED TO MAKE ANY ARRANGEMENTS: Feynman to McLellan,

15 November 1960.

357 FUNDAMENTAL PHYSICS (IN THE SENSE OF: Feynman 1960a, 22.
357 WHAT WE ARE TALKING ABOUT IS REAL : Feynman to Ashok Arora, 4

January 1967, CIT.

357 PITH BALLS AND INCLINED PLANES: F-W, 760.
358 1. HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT: Beyer and Williams 1957. Cf. Lindsay

1940, Bonner and Phillips 1957, and Mendenhall et al. 1950.

358 A GENERATION-OLD TEXT BY ITS OWN LUMINARY: Millikan et al.
358 SO, WHAT IS OUR OVER-ALL PICTURE: Lectures, I-1–2.
359 IF WATER—WHICH IS NOTHING: Lectures, I-1–9.

359 GUIDE TO THE PERPLEXED: F-W, 762.
359 A TEAM OF CALTECH PHYSICS PROFESSORS: Sands, interview; D.

Goodstein 1989, 74.

360 PHYSICS BEFORE 1920: Lectures, I-2–3.
360 NOT THE PROBLEM OF FINDING NEW: Lectures, I-3–9.
360 IT IS THE ANALYSIS OF CIRCULATING: Ibid.
360 WHAT WE REALLY CANNOT DO: Lectures, I-3–10.
360 WELL, THE HOUR IS UP: F-W, 765.
360 HE TIMED HIS DIAGRAMS: Sands, interview.
361 IN THE GRADUAL INCREASE IN THE COMPLEXITY: Lectures, I-4–2.
362 THEY DEPEND UPON HOW: Lectures, I-17–2.
362 EVEN PHYSICISTS FELT THEY WERE LEARNING: Stabler 1967, 48; Lectures,

I-20–7.

362 IT IS A WONDERFUL THING: Lectures, I-20–7.
363 THE RATCHET AND PAWL WORKS: Lectures, I-46–9.
363 AS THE MONTHS WENT ON: F-W, 766.
363 I’VE SPOKEN TO SOME: D. Goodstein 1989, 74.
363 IT IS ODD: CPL, 13.
364 GIVE A HUMAN APPROACH : Tord Pramberg to Feynman, 15 November

1966, and Feynman to Tord Pramberg, 4 January 1966, CIT.

364 WHEN YOU HAVE LEARNED: Feynman to Ashok Arora, 4 January 1967,

CIT.

364 WITH THIS QUESTION PHILOSOPHY BEGAN: Heidegger 1959, 20.
365 ALL SATELLITES TRAVEL: CPL, 19.
365 THAT IS THE SAME: Ibid., 33.
365 EXACTLY THE SAME LAW: Ibid., 34.
365 MEANWHILE, WHY DOES AN OBJECT: Ibid., 19.
366 SCIENCE REPUDIATES PHILOSOPHY: Quoted in Ziman 1978, 1.
366 NONE OF THE ENTITIES THAT APPEAR: Park 1988, xx.
366 LIKE TOURISTS MOVING IN: CPL, 173.
366 QUESTIONS ABOUT A THEORY: Slater, “Electrodynamics of Ponderable
Bodies,” Journal of the Franklin institute 225 (1938):277. Quoted by
Schweber, forthcoming.

366 AN UNDERSTANDING OF THE LAW: CPL, 169.
367 AFTERWARD, MURRAY GELL-MANN “COUNTERED”: SYJ, 290.

367 THEY COUNTED A CERTAIN NUMBER: CPL, 169.
367 “YES,” SAYS THE ASTRONOMER: Ibid., 170.
368 TO DYSON’S ASTONISHMENT: Dyson to his parents, October 1948.
368 OH, NO, IT’S NOT SERIOUS: Dyson, interview; Dyson 1990.
368 HIS MOTIVATION WAS TO DISCOVER: Dyson 1990, 210.
368 DIFFERENT IDEAS FOR GUESSING: CPL, 168.
369 TO GET SOMETHING THAT WOULD PRODUCE: Ibid., 169.
369 WHAT CAN YOU EXPLAIN: Stephen Wolfram, telephone interview.
369 IF YOU GET HOLD OF TWO MAGNETS: Untitled videotape, n.d., recorded for

the British Broadcasting Corporation.

371 I THINK THAT FOR SCIENTIFIC: Quine 1987, 109. 371 THE POST-SCHOLASTIC

ERA: Ziman 1992.

371 THE SCIENTIST HAS A LOT OF EXPERIENCE: Feynman 1955c, 14.
372 GREAT VALUE OF A SATISFACTORY PHILOSOPHY : Notes, “The Uncertainty of

Science,” PERS.

372 THE KIND OF A PERSONAL GOD: Dan L. Thrapp, “Science, Religion Conflict
Traced,” Los Angeles Times, 30 June 1956. Cf. Feynman 1956a.
372 IT DOESN’T SEEM TO ME: Interview for “Viewpoint,” with Bill Stout,
transcript, CIT. Feynman complained to the station: “It was said at one
time that my views might antagonize people…. I consider your refusal
to utilize the program recorded with me as a direct censorship of the
expression of my views.” Feynman to Bill Whitley, 14 May 1959, CIT.

372 THE GROUND OF ALL THAT IS: Polkinghorne 1990.
373 POETS SAY SCIENCE TAKES AWAY: Lectures, I-3–6 n.
373 I HAVE ARGUED FLYING SAUCERS: Feynman 1963c, 62.
373 IF IT’S NOT A MIRACLE: Ibid., 64.
374 ORANGE BALLS OF LIGHT: Ibid., 61.
374 I HAD THE MOST REMARKABLE EXPERIENCE: Ibid., 66.
374 I WAS UPSTAIRS TYPEWRITING: Ibid.
375 A DESK-THUMPING, FOOT-STAMPING SHOUT: Fine 1991, 271.
375 THE GREAT LESSON OF TWENTIETH-CENTURY: Ibid., 274.
376 THE NOBEL COMMITTEE HAS AWARDED : “Nobel Prize for Einstein,” New

York Times, 10 November 1922, 4.

376 AS THE NE PLUS ULTRA OF HONORS: Zuckerman 1977, 11.
377 EACH FALL, AS THE ANNOUNCEMENT NEARED : “I always thought—I mean, I
thought that there was a possibility that I might get a Nobel prize,

because 1 thought somebody might think the work in helium, or maybe
the beta decay, or even the electrodynamics might be something for
the Nobel prize…. Each year when the Nobel prize talking comes
around, of course you half think, maybe it’s possible.” F-W, 800–801.
378 THE WESTERN UNION “TELEFAX": Erik Rundberg to Feynman, 21 October

1965, PERS.

378 THE FIRST CALL HAD COME: F-W, 801; “Dr. Richard Feynman Nobel

Laureate!” California Tech, 22 October 1965, 1.

378 WILL YOU PLEASE TELL US: F-W, 804.
378 WHAT APPLICATIONS DOES THIS PAPER : “Dr. Richard Feynman Nobel

Laureate!” 378 LISTEN, BUDDY, IF I COULD TELL YOU: F-W, 804.

378 JULIAN SCHWINGER CALLED: Schwinger, interview.
378 I THOUGHT YOU WOULD BE HAPPY: Feynman to Lucille Feynman, n.d.,

PERS.

379 [FEYNMAN:] CONGRATULATIONS: “Dr. Richard Feynman Nobel Laureate!”

379 THERE WERE CABLES FROM SHIPBOARD: F-W, 806.

379 HE PRACTICED JUMPING BACKWARD: Ibid., 808–9.
380 FEYNMAN REALIZED THAT HE HAD NEVER READ: Ibid., 812.
380 HE BELIEVED THAT HISTORIANS: Feynman 1965a.
380 WE HAVE A HABIT IN WRITING: Ibid.
380 AS I WAS STUPID: Ibid.
381 THE CHANCE IS HIGH: Feynman 1965c.
381 I DISCOVERED A GREAT DIFFICULTY: Ibid.
382 THE ODDS THAT YOUR THEORY: Feynman 1965a.
382 DR. CRICK THANKS YOU: Quoted in Zuckerman 1977, 224.
383 MR. FEYNMAN WILL PAY THE SUM: Giuseppe Cocconi to Victor F.

Weisskopf, 2 February 1976, CIT

383 HE BEGAN BY SCRIBBLING A NOTE: Feynman to B. L. Kropp, 9 November

1960, CIT.

383 MY DESIRE TO RESIGN: Feynman to Detlev W. Bronk, 10 August 1961.

CIT.

384 THANK YOU FOR YOUR WILLINGNESS: Detlev W. Bronk to Feynman, 26

October 1961, CIT.

384 SUPPOSE THAT WE TRULY: Philip Handler to Feynman, 25 June 1969,

CIT.

384 I HAVE YOUR SOMEWHAT CRYPTIC NOTE: Philip Handler to Feynman, 31

July 1969, CIT.

384 HE TURNED DOWN HONORARY DEGREES: George W. Beadle to Feynman,
4 January 1967, and William J. McGill to Feynman, 16 February 1976,
CIT.

3 8 4 INTRODUCE A DRAFT OF FRESH AIR: Martin Mann to Feynman, 13

September 1962, and reply, CIT.

384 HE REFUSED TO SIGN PETITIONS: E.g., Feynman to Margaret Gardiner, 15

May 1967, CIT.

385 THE COMMENT YOU SENT BACK WITH OUR QUESTIONNAIRE: R. Hobart Ellis,

Jr., to Feynman, 25 August 1966, and reply, CIT.

385 FEYNMAN HID BEHIND HER DOOR: Helen Tuck, interview, Pasadena.
385 A DISCRETIONARY KITTY: Goldberger, interview.
386 IT MUST HAVE BEEN VERY DIFFICULT: Holton, interview.
386 HANS BETHE TURNED SIXTY: R. E. Marshak to Feynman, 11 May 1965,

and reply, CIT.

386 DON’T LET ANYBODY CRITICIZE: Feynman to James D. Watson, 10

February 1967, CIT.

387 IT IS OF COURSE A YANG-MILLS THEORY: Gell-Mann 1983a, 3.
387 BY THE WAY, SOME PEOPLE: Ibid.
388 THE POINT WAS HARDLY LOST: As Gell-Mann said at a memorial service
for Feynman in 1989: “Everybody knows that Richard didn’t think one
should be able to tell the difference between one bird and another….
He tried to show in yet another way that he could stand out from the
herd—like not being a birdwatcher.” Talk at Feynman memorial, San
Francisco, 18 January 1989.

388 SITS CALMLY BEHIND HIS DESK: Riordan 1987, 192.
389 MURRAY’S MASK WAS A MAN: Coleman, interview.
390 ZWEIG, FAR MORE VULNERABLE: Zweig 1981.
390 THEIR PALPITANT PIPING, CHIRRUP: Quoted in Crease and Mann 1986,

185.

391 THE CONCRETE QUARK MODEL: Zweig, interview.
391 IT IS FUN TO SPECULATE ABOUT THE WAY QUARKS: Gell-Mann 1964.
391 I ALWAYS CONSIDERED THAT TO BE A CODED MESSAGE : Polkinghome 1989,

110.

391 FOR GELL-MANN THIS BECAME: “People have deliberately misunderstood

this for twenty-seven years.” Gell-Mann, interview.

391 I’VE ALWAYS TAKEN AN ATTITUDE: F-W, II-26.
391 AT FIRST HIS SYLLABUS CONTAINED: Zweig, interview; F-W, II-15.
392 A SINGLE BUBBLE CHAMBER: Traweek 1988, 52–53.
392 LIKE TRYING TO FIGURE OUT A POCKET WATCH : Quoted in Riordan 1987,

151–52.

392 THE PHYSICISTS WHO WOULD GATHER: Riordan 1987, 149.
393 HE ISOLATED A REMARKABLE REGULARITY: Bjorken 1989, 57; Bjorken,

telephone interview.

393 OXFORD ENGLISH DICTIONARY: “Each of the hypothetical point-like
constituents of the nucleon that were invoked by R. P. Feynman to
explain the way the nucleon inelastically scatters electrons of very high
energy.” A Supplement to the Oxford English Dictionary, 279.
394 QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS HAD ITS PARTONS: Feynman 1969b, 241.
394 HE CHOSE NOT TO DECIDE: Feynman to Michael Riordan, 26 February

1986, CIT.

394 WHEN FEYNMAN DIAGRAMS ARRIVED: Bjorken 1989, 56.
394 FEYNMAN TOOK ON A PROJECT IN 1970: Feynman et al. 1971.
395 CONVERTED INTO A QUARKERIAN: F-W, II-47.
395 A QUARK PICTURE MAY ULTIMATELY PERVADE: Feynman et al. 1971, 2727.
395 HE DISLIKED THE FANFARE: “These things were quarks and antiquarks
(and sometimes gluons), but he didn’t want to call them by their names.
At first, he wasn’t sure that that’s what they were, but as time went on it
became clearer, and it annoyed me that he still didn’t acknowledge that
he was talking about quarks. Eventually, some authors began to speak
of ‘quark partons,’ but as if they were somehow different from ordinary
current quarks.
 “The so-called parton model was an approximate description of
quarks and gluons that could apply in the appropriate high-energy
limits if the interaction of the particles became weak at short distances
(as turned out to be the case in quantum chromodynamics). Dick
painted a naïve picture, which was taken not just as an approximation
to an unknown theory, but as a kind of revealed truth.
 “Physicists all over the world learned the ‘parton’ story, memorized it,
and immediately began to use it to interpret experiments. In other
words Dick has oversimplified the picture so that it could be used by
everybody.” Gell-Mann, personal communication.

395 WE HAVE BUILT A VERY TALL HOUSE OF CARDS: Feynman 1972c.
395 I’M A LITTLE BIT FRUSTRATED: F-W, II-86.
3 9 6 QUIETLY NOMINATED GELL-MANN AND ZWEIG: They never knew it. B.
Wagel to Feynman, 26 January 1977, CIT. Gell-Mann, Zweig,
interviews.

396 JEE-JEE-JEE-JU-JU. JEE-JEE-JEE-JU-JU: F-L.
396 IT TOOK YEARS FOR FEYNMAN’S CHILDREN: Michelle Feynman, Carl

Feynman, Gweneth Feynman, interviews.

397 RICHARD, I’M COLD: Leighton, interview.
397 I COULD HAVE KILLED HIM: Feynman to Sheila Sorenson, 21 October
1974, CIT. 397 TRUMPET PLAYING—SOCIAL WORKER—ZYGOPHALATELIST :
Feynman to Carl Feynman, 18 February 1980, PERS.

397 AFTER MUCH EFFORT AT UNDERSTANDING: Ibid.
398 WHAT MAKES IT MOVE: Feynman 1966a.
398 TO TELL A FIRST-GRADER: Ibid., 14.
398 YOU SAY, “WITHOUT USING": Ibid., 15.
398 SHOE LEATHER WEARS OUT: Ibid., 16.
398 FEYNMAN TAUGHT THIRTY-FOUR: D. Goodstein 1989, 73.
399 I COULDN’T REDUCE IT: Ibid. 75.
399 IT IS AN EXAMPLE OF THE USE OF WORDS: Feynman 1964a, 16.
400 I DOUBT THAT ANY CHILD: Ibid., 3.
401 MICHELLE LEARNED THAT HE HAD A THOUSAND : Michelle Feynman,

interview.

401 OH YES, WE DO: Gweneth Feynman, interview.
401 TRAVELING IN THE SWISS ALPS: Gweneth Feynman, interview.
402 FEYNMAN’S TUMOR: C. M. Haskell, interview, Los Angeles.
402 FIVE-YEAR SURVIVAL RATES : Sheldon C. Binder, Bertram Katz, and Barry
Sheridan, “Retroperitoneal Liposarcoma,” Annals of Surgery, March
1978, 260.

402 YOU ARE OLD, FATHER FEYNMAN: “Father Feynman,” n.d., CIT.
402 WITH A POSTDOCTORAL STUDENT : Feynman et al. 1977; Field and

Feynman 1977; Field and Feynman 1978.

403 FEYNMAN DID NOT REALIZE THAT FIELD: Richard Field, telephone

interview.

403 I DON’T GET ANY PHYSICS: Victor F. Weisskopf to Feynman, 23 March

1979, CIT.

403 QCD FIELD THEORY WITH SIX FLAVORS: “Qualitative Behavior,” typescript

for Feynman 1981, CIT.

404 VASCULAR INCIDENT: In Chang Kim, interview, Pasadena.
404 FEYNMAN NEEDED SEVENTY-EIGHT PINTS: Haskell, interview. Gweneth

Feynman, interview.

404 IT’S IMPOSSIBLE TO TALK: Cvitanović, interview.
404 MY WIFE: Douglas R. Hofstadter, telephone interview.
405 I HAVE NOT ACCOMPLISHED ANYTHING: Feynman to Robert B. Leighton, 10

June 1974, CIT.

405 WHAT THE HELL IS FEYNMAN INVITED FOR: Feynman to Sidney Coleman,

13 August 1976, CIT.

405 ANOTHER PIECE OF EVIDENCE: Coleman to Feynman, 26 July 1976, CIT.
405 AGGRESSIVE DOPINESS: Carl Feynman, interview.
406 HE LISTENED PATIENTLY AS BABA RAM DAS: SYJ, 303–5.
4 0 6 PEOPLE IN HIGHER ECHELONS: He titled the talk, “Los Alamos from

Below.” Feynman 1975, 105.
406 STILL, HE WOULD EMERGE: SYJ, 306.
406 SPORADICALLY, HE WORKED : E.g., Jon N. Leonard to Feynman, 3
November 1987, and Peter H. Hambling to Feynman, 4 August 1987,
CIT.

407 ARE WE PHYSICS GIANTS: Feynman to Philip Morrison, 23 May 1972,

CIT. 407 MYSTICISM, EXPANDED CONSCIOUSNESS: SYJ, 309.

407 IT HAS TO DO WITH THE QUESTION: Videotape, courtesy of Ralph Leighton.
407 PEACE OF MIND AND ENJOYMENT: Quoted in Leighton 1991, 83–84.
408 IT SEEMED TO GWENETH: Gweneth Feynman, interview; William G.

Bradley, interview.

408 BUT YOU CAN’T SEE: Feynman to William G. Bradley, 13 July 1984, CIT.
409 OKAY, START YOUR WATCH: Weiner, interview.
409 A RECORD OF THE DAY-TO-DAY WORK: F-W, II-4.
410 TODAY I WENT OVER TO THE HUNTINGTON: F-L.
410 AND THE NEXT MORNING, ALL RIGHT: Ibid.
411 “LISTEN,” I SAID TO THE DISPATCHER: SYJ, 236.
411 A NICE BROOKLYN RING: Edwin Barber to Feynman, 2 March 1984, CIT.
411 GELL-MANN’S RAGE COULD BE HEARD: E.g., Tuck, interview.
411 OF COURSE IT WASN’T TRUE: SYJ, 229. He also changed “Murray GellMann and I wrote a paper on the theory” to “Murray Gell-Mann

compared and combined our ideas and wrote a paper on the theory”
(232). Gell-Mann still called it “that joke book.” He knew that Feynman
had not deliberately tried to take undeserved credit, but he was hurt
nonetheless. “He was not at all a thief of ideas—even very generous in
some ways,” Gell-Mann said. “It’s just that he was not always capable
of regarding other people as really existing.”

411 A NIFTY BLONDE: SYJ, 241 and 168.
412 OUT WITH HIS GIRL FRIEND: Lectures, I-3–7.
412 DEAR ROTHSTEIN: DON’T BUG ME: “Protest,” mimeograph sheet, CIT.
4 1 2 HE HAD SPENT MANY PLEASANT HOURS: Jenijoy La Belle, interview,
Pasadena; “Feynman Commends La Belle,” letter to California Tech,
5 March 1976; La Belle 1989.
413 AND, LIKE FALLING IN LOVE: NL, 435.
413 SO WHAT HAPPENED TO THE OLD THEORY: NL, 456.
413 THERE IS IN THE WORLD OF PHYSICS: Feynman 1972e, 1.
414 GENERALLY MR. FEYNMAN IS NOT JOKING: Morrison 1985, 43.
414 NOT AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY: Feynman to Robert Crease, 18 September
1985, CIT. And Feynman to Klaus Stadler, 15 October 1985, CIT: “This
shows a complete misunderstanding of the nature of my book…. It is
not in any way a scientific book, nor a serious one. It is not even an
autobiography. It is only a series of short disconnected anecdotes,
meant for the general reader which, we hope, the reader will find
amusing.”

414 WHAT I REALLY WAS: Feynman to Crease.
414 A HALF-HOUR AFTER THE LAUNCH: Richard Witkin, “Canaveral Hopes for

Success Fade,” New York Times, 6 March 1958, 1.

414 THEY USED A ROOM-SIZE: Hibbs, interview.
4 1 6 AN OUTSIDE GROUP OF EXPERTS: “Reagan names panel on shuttle
explosion,” Walter V. Robinson, Washington Post, 4 February 1986, 1.
417 ARMSTRONG SAID ON THE DAY: “President Names 12-Member Panel in
Shuttle Inquiry,” Gerald Boyd, New York Times, 4 February 1986, 1.
417 WE ARE NOT GOING TO CONDUCT: Ibid. In the commission’s first closed
session, on February 10, he emphasized: “This is not an adversarial
procedure. This commission is not in any way adversarial …” Report,
IV, 244.

417 YOU’RE RUINING MY LIFE: William R. Graham, telephone interview.

417 FEYNMAN WAS NOW SUFFERING: Haskell, interview.
417 FEYNMAN HIMSELF REFUSED TO CONSIDER: Haskell, interview.
417 HE IMMEDIATELY ARRANGED A BRIEFING : Hibbs, interview; Charles Lifer,

interview; Winston Gin, interview; WDY, 119–21.

419 ROGERS OPENED THE FIRST: Report, IV, 1.
419 IN RESPONSE, MOORE DENIED: Ibid., 21.
419 A CONCERN BY THIOKOL: Ibid., 97.
419 NEWSPAPER REPORTS THE NEXT DAY: Esp. David Sanger, “NASA Seems
Surprised By Aggressive Queries,” New York Times, 7 February
1986, A19.

419 THIS IS WHAT WE WOULD HAVE CALLED: Report, IV, 220.
419 EVERYTHING THAT I KNOW: Ibid., 221.
420 WHEN WE ASK QUESTIONS: Ibid., 222.
420 YOU SAID WE DON’T EXPECT IT: Ibid., 224.
420 CO-PILOT TO PILOT: Donald J. Kutyna, interview, Peterson Air Force

Base, Colo.; WDY, 126.

420 I HAVE A PICTURE OF THAT SEAL: Report, IV, 224.
421 THE LACK OF A GOOD SECONDARY SEAL: “August 19, 1985 Headquarters

Briefing,” Report, I, 139; WDY, 135.

421 LOSS OF VEHICLE, MISSION, AND CREW: “NASA Had Warning of a Disaster
Risk Posed by Booster,” Philip Boffey, New York Times, 9 February
1986, 1.

4 2 2 YOU KNOW, THOSE THINGS LEAK: WDY, 139–40; Kutyna, interview.

Feynman misremembered this as a telephone conversation.

422 I THINK IT GOES WITHOUT SAYING: Report, IV, 244.
422 LAWRENCE MULLOY, PROJECT MANAGER: Ibid., 291.
422 HOW ARE THESE MATERIALS, THIS PUTTY AND THE RUBBER: Ibid., 347.
423 IF THIS MATERIAL WEREN’T RESILIENT: Ibid., 345.
423 HE HAD MADE AN OFFICIAL REQUEST: WDY, 146.
423 FEYNMAN 

IS BECOMING A REAL PAIN : David Sanger, personal

communication.

424 YOU DIDN’T, I ASSUME: Report, IV, 380–82.
424 MULLOY, UNDER FURTHER QUESTIONING: “NASA Acknowledges Cold
Affects Boosters Seals,” Philip Boffey, New York Times, 12 February
1986, 1.

424 THE PUBLIC SAW WITH THEIR OWN EYES: Dyson 1992, 284.
425 TO EXAGGERATE: to exaggerate how economical: WDY, 214.
425 ONE OF THE MOST PRODUCTIVE: Report, I, 1.
426 IT WAS A GREAT BIG WORLD: WDY, 158.
426 KUTYNA TOLD HIM HE WAS THE ONLY: Kutyna, interview; WDY, 156.
426 IN BETWEEN, HE MADE REPEATED VISITS: F-L.
426 I AM DETERMINED TO DO THE JOB: Feynman to Gweneth Feynman, 12

February 1986, quoted in WDY, 157.

426 THE COMMISSION STRONGLY RECOMMENDS: WDY, 200–201.
4 2 7 HISTORY OF O-RING PROBLEMS HAD BEEN REPORTED: E.g. Report, I,

Appendix H; Graham, interview.

427 OVERALL HE ESTIMATED: Feynman 1986, F-2. 427 A KIND OF RUSSIAN

ROULETTE: Report, I, 148.

427 IT HAS TO BE UNDERSTOOD: Ibid., IV, 817.
428 A TEAM OF STATISTICIANS: Dalai et al. 1989; Bruce Hoadley, telephone

interview.

428 FEYNMAN DISCOVERED THAT SOME ENGINEERS: WDY, 182–83.
428 FOR A SUCCESSFUL TECHNOLOGY: Feynman 1986, F-5.

EPILOGUE

429 RATHER THAN EMBARRASS THEM: Lectures, I-16–1.
430 DID THE UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE IMPOSE: Lectures, I-6–10.
430 THE UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE SIGNALED: Hawking 1987, 55.
430 IT IS USUALLY THOUGHT THAT THIS INDETERMINACY: Lectures, I-38–9.
430 IF WATER FALLS OVER A DAM: Ibid.
431 FIFTY YEARS OF PARTICLE PHYSICS: Cahn and Goldhaber 1989, ix.
432 A CONTRIVED INTELLECTUAL STRUCTURE: Schwartz 1992, 173.
432 PEOPLE SAY TO ME, “ARE YOU LOOKING: F-Sy.
432 WE MAY NOW BE NEAR THE END: Hawking 1987, 156.
432 I’VE HAD A LIFETIME OF THAT : Interview conducted by P. C. W. Davies,

transcript, CIT.

433 YOUR CAREER SPANS THE PERIOD: Interview conducted by Robert
Crease, 22 February 1985; transcript, courtesy of Crease. Robert
Crease to Feynman, 18 July 1985, CIT.

434 I SEE YOU’VE MET DICK: Robert Crease to Feynman, 18 July 1985, CIT.

435 FORGET ALL THAT “LOCAL MINIMA” STUFF: Hillis 1989, 82.
435 AND HE BEGAN TO PRODUCE MAVERICK RESEARCH: Feynman 1982;
Feynman 1984. 435 THE PHYSICAL REVIEW OF THE BLIND MEN: Lectures, II20–11.

435 WE ARE ALL REDUCTIONISTS TODAY : Weinberg 1987a, 66; Weinberg,

personal communication.

436 THE INFINITE VARIETY AND NOVELTY: Lectures, II-41–12.
436 HE MAY ALSO BELIEVE IN THE EXISTENCE: Einstein and Infeld 1938, 31.
436 ONE OF THE GREAT PHILOSOPHERS: Mermin 1985, 47; Feynman 1982,

471.

437 I HAVE DECIDED IT IS NOT A VERY GOOD IDEA: Feynman to Lee Dye, 23

September

1987, CIT.
437 IT IS REALLY LIKE THE SHAPE: Ulam 1976, xi.
437 I’M GOING TO DIE: Michelle Feynman, interview.
437 HE WAS WATCHED AND GUARDED : Joan Feynman, Gweneth Feynman,

and Frances Lewine, interviews.

438 TAUGHT PEOPLE MOST OF THE GOOD STUFF: Hillis 1989, 83.
438 YOU SEE, ONE THING IS, I CAN LIVE: F-Sy.
438 I’D HATE TO DIE TWICE: Gweneth Feynman, interview.

A FEYNMAN BIBLIOGRAPHY

Because almost all Feynman’s work originated with the spoken word, and
because its publication took so many shapes, formal and informal, no final
bibliography will ever be compiled. Neither Feynman nor the Caltech
libraries maintained more than a partial listing. Some lectures were
published repeatedly, in journals and collections, in versions that vary
slightly or not at all. Others exist only in the form of Feynman’s notes before
the fact, a student’s handwritten notes after the fact, a university preprint, a
typed transcript, an edited or unedited conference proceeding, a file on a
computer disk, or a video- or audiotape. Some manuscripts are virtually
intact and publishable; others are no more than notes on a placemat; and
in between is an unbroken continuum.

The following is a guide to work of Feynman’s that can be construed as
published in any form; major unpublished work; and other important
manuscripts and papers cited in this book.
1933–34. “The Calculus: Scribble-In Book.” Notebook. AIP.
1935. “The Calculus of Finite Differences.” The f(x). Far Rockaway High

School Mathematics Club. January, 1. CIT

Feynman and Welton, T. A. 1936–37. Notebook. AIP.
1939a. “Forces and Stresses in Molecules.” Thesis submitted in partial
fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of bachelor of science in
physics. AIP.

1939b. “Forces in Molecules.” Physical Review 56:340.
Vallarta, M. S., and Feynman. 1939. “The Scattering of Cosmic Rays by

the Stars of a Galaxy.” Physical Review 55:506.

1940. “Notebook of Things I Don’t Know About.” Notebook. CIT.
1941d. “The Interaction Theory of Radiation.” Typescript. AIP.
1941b. “Particles Interacting thru an Intermediate Oscillator.” Draft pages

toward Ph.D. thesis. PERS.

Feynman and Wheeler, John Archibald. 1941. “Reaction of the Absorber
as the Mechanism of Radiative Damping. Abstract.” Physical Review
59: 682.

1942a. Ph.D. thesis manuscript. CIT.
1942b. “The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics.” Ph.D.

thesis, Princeton University.

1942c. Effects of Space Charge; Use of Sine Waves. Isotron Report no.

2, 5 January. SMY.

1942d. Kinematics of the Separator. Isotron Report no. 7, 14 April. SMY.
1942e. The Design of the Buncher and Analyzer. Isotron Report no. 17,

26 August. SMY.

1942f. A Note on the Cascade Operation of Isotrons. Isotron Report no.

20, 8 September. SMY.

Wheeler, John Archibald, and Feynman. 1942. “Action at a Distance in
Classical Physics: Reaction of the Absorber as the Mechanism of
Radiative Damping.” Typescript. AIP.

1943d. The Operation of Isotrons in Cascade. Isotron Report no. 29, 27

January. SMY.

1943b. Factors Which Influence the Separation. Isotron Report no. 35, 22

February. SMY.

1944. “Theoretical Department.” Unsigned draft typescript for Smyth 1945.

LANL.

Ashkin, J.; Ehrlich, R.; and Feynman. 1944. “First Report on the Hydride.”

Typescript, 31 January. LANL.

1945. “A New Approximate Method for Rapid Calculation of Critical

Amounts of X.” Typescript. LANL.

Wheeler, John Archibald, and Feynman. 1945. “Interaction with the
Absorber as the Mechanism of Radiation.” Reviews of Modern
Physics 17:157.

1946a. Amplifier Response. Los Alamos Reports, LA-593. LANL.
1946b. A Theorem and Its Application to Finite Tampers . Los Alamos

Reports, LA- 608, Series B. LANL.

Feynman and Bethe, Hans A. 1946. Abstract for New York Meeting of the

American Physical Society, 19–21 September. Typescript. CIT.

1947. “Theory of Positrons.” Notes. CIT.
Feynman and Welton, T. A. 1947. The Calculation of Critical Masses
Including the Effects of the Distribution of Neutron Energies. Los
Alamos Reports, Series B, LA-524. LANL.

1948a. “Space-Time Approach to Non-Relativistic Quantum Mechanics.”

Reviews of Modern Physics 20:367.

1948b. “A Relativistic Cut-Off for Classical Electrodynamics,” Physical

Review 74:939.

1948c. “Relativistic Cut-Off 

for Quantum Electrodynamics.” Physical

Review 74: 1430.

1948d. “Pocono Conference.” Physics Today, June, 8.
1948e. “Pocono Conference.” Typescript. LOC.
1948f. Paper T5: “Theory of Positrons.” Talk prepared for American

Physical Society meeting in January 1949. CIT.

1949a. “The Theory of Positrons.” Physical Review 76:749.
1949b. “Space-Time Approach to Quantum Electrodynamics.” Physical

Review 76:769.

Feynman; Metropolis, Nicholas; and Teller, Edward. 1949. “Equations of
State of Elements Based on the Generalized Fermi-Thomas Theory.”
Physical Review 75:1561.

Wheeler, John Archibald, and Feynman. 1949. “Classical Electrodynamics
in Terms of Direct Interparticle Action.” Reviews of Modern Physics
21:425.

1950. 

“Mathematical Formulation of 

the Quantum Theory of

Electromagnetic Interaction.” Physical Review 80:440.

1951a. 

“An Operator Calculus Having Applications 

in Quantum

Electrodynamics.” Physical Review 84:108.

1951b. “The Concept of Probability in Quantum Mechanics.” Second
Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability,
University of California, Berkeley, 1950:533.

Brown, Laurie M., and Feynman. 1952. “Radiative Corrections to Compton

Scattering.” Physical Review 85:231.

Lopes, J. Leite, and Feynman. 1952. “On the Pseudoscalar Meson Theory
of the Deuteron.” Symposium on New Research Techniques in
Physics, 15–29 July.

1953a. “The Lambda Transition in Liquid Helium.” Physical Review

90:1116.

1953b. “Atomic Theory of Lambda Transition in Helium.” Physical Review

91:1291.

1953c. “Atomic Theory of Liquid Helium near Absolute Zero.” Physical

Review 91:1301.

1953d. “Atomic Theory of Liquid Helium.” Talk at the Theoretical Physics

Conference in Tokyo, September 1953. In Notas de Físicas 12.

1954a. “Atomic Theory of the Two-Fluid Model of Liquid Helium.” Physical

Review 94:262.

1954b. “The Present Situation in Fundamental Theoretical Physics.”

Academia Brasileira de Ciencias 26:51.

Feynman; Baranger, Michel; and Bethe, Hans A. 1954. “Relativistic

Correction to the Lamb Shift.” Physical Review 92:482.

Feynman and Speisman, G. 1954. “Proton-Neutron Mass Difference.”

Physical Review 94:50.

1955a. “Slow Electrons in a Polar Crystal.” Physical Review 97:660.
1955b. “Application of Quantum Mechanics to Liquid Helium.” In Progress
in Low Temperature Physics. Edited by C. J. Goiter. Amsterdam:
North Holland.

1955c. “The Value of Science.” Transcript of address at the autumn 1955
meeting of the National Academy of Sciences. In Engineering and
Science, June, 3.

Feynman and Cohen, Michael. 1955. “The Character of the Roton State in

Liquid Helium.” Progress in Theoretical Physics 14:261.

1956a. “The Relation of Science and Religion.” Engineering and Science,

June, 20.

1956b. “Dr. Feynman Replies to Mr. Sohler’s ‘New Hypothesis.’”

Engineering and Science, October, 52.

Feynman and Cohen, Michael. 1956. “Energy Spectrum of the Excitations

in Liquid Helium.” Physical Review 102:1189.

Feynman; de Hoffmann, Frederic; and Serber, Robert. 1956. “Dispersion
of the Neutron Emission in U-235 Fission.” Journal of Nuclear Energy
3:64.

1957a. “Superfluidity and Superconductivity.” Reviews of Modern Physics

29:205.

1957b. “Alternative to the Two-Component Neutrino Theory.” Remarks at
the Seventh Annual Rochester Conference on High-Energy Physics,
15–19 April. In Ascoli et al. 1957, IX-42.

1957c. “The Role of Science in the World Today.” Proceedings of the

Institute of World Affairs 33:17.

Feynman; Vernon, F. L.; and Hellwarth, Robert W. 1957. “Geometric
Representation of the Schrodinger Equation for Solving Maser
Problems.” Journal of Applied Physics 28:49.

Cohen, Michael, and Feynman. 1957. “Theory of Inelastic Scattering of

Cold Neutrons from Liquid Helium.” Physical Review 107:13.

1958a. “Excitations in Liquid Helium.” Physica 24:18.
1958b. “A Model of Strong and Weak Couplings.” Typescript. CIT.
1958c. “Forbidding of ? – ? Decay.” Talk at Annual International
Conference on High Energy Physics at CERN, Geneva, 30 June-5
July. In Ferretti 1958.

Feynman and Gell-Mann, Murray. 1958a. “Theory of the Fermi Interaction.”

Physical Review 109:193.

Feynman and Gell-Mann, Murray, 1958b. “Theoretical Ideas Used in
Analyzing Strange Particles.” Manuscript for Geneva Conference on
the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy. CIT.

Feynman and Gell-Mann, Murray. 1958c. “Problems of the Strange
Particles.” Proceedings of the Second Geneva Conference on the
Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy.

1960a. “There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom: An Invitation to Enter a New
Field of Physics.” Talk at the annual meeting of the American Physical
Society, 29 December 1959. In Engineering and Science, February,
22.

1960b. “The Status of the Conserved Vector Current Hypothesis.” In

Sudarshan et al. 1960, 501.

1961a. “The Present Status of Quantum Electrodynamics.” Talk for 1961
Solvay Conference. Typescript. CIT. In Extrait des Rapports et
Discussions, Solvay. Institut International de Physique, October.

1961b. “Theory of Gravitation.” Faraday Lecture, 13 April. Transcript.

PERS.

1961c. Quantum Electrodynamics. New York: W. A. Benjamin.
1961d. Theory of Fundamental Processes. New York: W. A. Benjamin.
Edgar, R. S.; Feynman; Klein, S.; Lielausis, I.; and Steinberg, C. M. 1961.
“Mapping Experiments with r Mutants of Bacteriophage T4D.”

Genetics 47:179.

Feynman; Hellwarth, R. W.; Iddings, C. K.; and Platzman, P. M. 1962.
“Mobility of Slow Electrons in a Polar Crystal.” Physical Review
127:1004.

1963a. “The Problem of Teaching Physics in Latin America.” Transcript of
keynote speech given at the First Inter-American Conference on
Physics Education in Rio de Janeiro. In Engineering and Science,
November, 21.

1963b. “The Quantum Theory of Gravitation.” Acta Physica Polonica

24:697.

1963c. “This Unscientific Age.” John Danz Lectures. Transcript. CIT.
Feynman; Leighton, Robert B.; and Sands, Matthew. 1963. The Feynman

Lectures on Physics. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

Feynman and Vernon, F. L. 1963. “The Theory of a General Quantum
System Interacting with a Linear Dissipative System.” Annals of
Physics 24:118.

1964a. “Comments on the New Arithmetic Textbooks.” Typescript. PERS.
1964b. “Theory and Applications of Mercerau’s Superconducting Circuits.”

Draft typescript. CIT.

Feynman; Gell-Mann, Murray; and Zweig, George. 1964. “Group U(6) ×
U(6) Generated by Current Components.” Physical Review Letters
13:678.

1965a. “The Development of 

the Space-Time View of Quantum
Electrodynamics.” Nobel Prize in Physics Award Address, Stockholm,
In Les Prix Nobel en 1965 (Stockholm: Nobel
11 December. 
Foundation, 1966); in Physics Today, August 1966, 31; in Science
(1966) 153:699; and in Weaver 1987, 2:433.

1965b. “The Development of 

the Space-Time View of Quantum
Electrodynamics.” Transcript, physics colloquium at California Institute
of Technology, 2 December. CIT.

1965c. “The Development of 

the Space-Time View of Quantum
Electrodynamics.” Talk at CERN, Geneva, 17 December. Tape
courtesy of Helen Tuck.

1965d. Address to Far Rockaway High School. Transcript. CIT.
1965e. The Character of Physical Law. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

1965f. “New Textbooks for the ‘New’ Mathematics.” Engineering and

Science, March, 9.

1965g. “Consequences of SU(3) Symmetry in Weak Interactions.” In
Symmetries in Elementary Particle Physics, III. New York: Ettore
Majorana Academic Press.

Feynman and Hibbs, Albert R. 1965. Quantum Mechanics and Path

Integrals. New York: McGraw-Hill.

1966a. “What Is Science?” Address to National Science Teachers

Association, 1–5 April. Corrected transcript. PERS.

1966b. “What Is and What Should Be the Role of Scientific Culture in

Modern Society?” Supplemento al Nuovo Cimento 4:292.
1969a. “What Is Science?” The Physics Teacher, September, 313.
1969b. “The Behavior of Hadron Collisions at Extreme Energies.” Talk at
Third International Conference on High Energy Collisions, State
University of New York, 5–6 September. In Yang et al. 1969, 237.
1969c. “Very High-Energy Collisions of Hadrons.” Physical Review Letters

23:1415.

1970. “Partons.” Talk at Symposium on the Past Decade in Particle
Theory, University of Texas at Austin, 14–17 April. In Sudarshan and
Ne’eman 1973, 773.

Thornber, K. K., and Feynman. 1970. “Velocity Acquired by an Electron in
a Finite Electric Field in a Polar Crystal.” Physical Review B10:4099.
Feynman; Kislinger, M.; and Ravndal, F. 1971. “Current Matrix Elements

from a Relativistic Quark Model.” Physical Review D3:2706.
1972a. “Closed Loops and Tree Diagrams.” In Klauder 1972, 355.
1972b. “Problems in Quantizing the Gravitational Field, and the Massless

Yang-Mills Field.” In Klauder 1972, 377.

1972c. Photon-Hadron Interactions. New York: W. A. Benjamin.
1972d. Statistical Mechanics: A Set of Lectures. New York: W. A.

Benjamin.

1972e. “The Proton Under the Electron Microscope.” Oersted Medal

Lecture. Manuscript. PERS.

1972f. “What Neutrinos Can Tell Us About Particles.” In Proceedings of
’72 Europhysics Conference. Budapest: OMKD

Neutrino 
Technoinform.

1974. “Structure of 

the Proton.” Talk at Dansk 

Ingeniorforening,

Copenhagen. Science 183:601.

1974b. “Conference Summary.” Talk at International Conference on
Neutrino Physics and Astrophysics, Philadelphia, 28 April. Typescript.
CIT.

1975. “Reminiscences of Wartime Los Alamos.” Talk at University of
California at Santa Barbara. Audio tapes. AIP. Edited version in
Engineering and Science, January, 11. Also in Badash et al. 1980,
105. Excerpted in SYJ, 90. [Page references to Badash et al.]

1976. “Gauge Theories.” Lecture at Les Houches, Session 29.
1977. “Correlations in Hadron Collisions at High Transverse Momentum.”
Talk at Orbis Scientiae 1977, University of Miami, Coral Gables,
Florida.

Feynman, Field, Richard D.; and Fox, Geoffrey C. 1977. “Correlations
among Particles and Jets Produced with Large Transverse Momenta.”
Nuclear Physics B 128:1.

Field, Richard D., and Feynman. 1977. “Quark Elastic Scattering as a
Source of High Transverse Momentum.” Physical Review D15:2590.

1978. Talk at Julian Schwinger’s 60th birthday celebration. AIP.
Field, Richard D., and Feynman. 1978. “A Parametrization of the

Properties of Quark Jets.” Nuclear Physics B136:1.

1981. “The Qualitative Behavior of Yang-Mills Theory in 2 + 1 Dimensions.”

Nuclear Physics B188:479.

1982. “Simulating Physics with Computers.” International Journal of

Theoretical Physics 21:467.

1984. “Quantum Mechanical Computers.” Plenary talk at IQEC-CLEO

Meeting, Anaheim, 19 June. Typescript.

1985a. Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! Adventures of a Curious

Character. New York: Norton.

1985b. QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter. Princeton:

Princeton University Press.

1986. “Personal Observations of Reliability of Shuttle.” In Report of the
Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident,
II-F.

1987a. “The Reason for Antiparticles.” In Feynman and Weinberg 1987, 1.

1987b. “Negative Probability.” In Hiley and Peat 1987, 235.
1987c. “Linear D Dimensional Vector Space.” Manuscript. PERS.
Feynman and Weinberg, Steven. 1987. Elementary Particles and the
Laws of Physics: The 1986 Dirac Memorial Lectures. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

1988. What Do You Care What Other People Think? Further Adventures

of a Curious Character. New York: Norton.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Albers, Donald J., and Alexanderson, G. L., eds. 1985. Mathematical

People: Profiles and Interviews. Boston: Birkhäuser.

Albert, Robert S., ed. 1983. Genius and Eminence: The Social
Psychology of Creativity and Exceptional Achievement. New
York: Pergamon Press.

Alt, Franz L. 1972. “Archeology of Computers: Reminiscences, 1945–
1 9 4 7 .” Communications of the Association for Computing
Machinery, July, 693.

Anderson, Philip W. 1972. “More Is Different.” Science 177:393. In

Weaver 1987, 3:586.

Andronikashvili, Elevter L. 1990. Reflections on Liquid Helium. Translated
by Robert Berman. New York: American Institute of Physics.
Ascoli, G.; Feldman, G.; Koester, Jr., L. J.; Newton, R.; Riesenfeld, W.;
Ross, M.; and Sachs, R. G., eds. 1957. High Energy Nuclear
Physics. Proceedings of 
the Seventh Annual Rochester
Conference, 15–19 April. New York: Interscience.

Aspray, William. 1990. John von Neumann and the Origins of Modern

Computing. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Atomic Energy Commission. 1954. “In the Matter of J. Robert

Oppenheimer.” Transcript of Hearings before Personnel Security Board.
Badash, Lawrence; Hirschfelder, Joseph O.; and Broida, Herbert P., eds.
1980. Reminiscences of Los Alamos, 1943–1945. Dordrecht:
Reidel.

Ballam, J.; Fitch, V L.; Fulton, T; Huang, K.; Rau, R. R.; and Treiman, S. B.,
eds. 1956. High Energy Nuclear Physics. Proceedings of the
Sixth Annual Rochester Conference, 3–7 April. New York:
Interscience.

Bashe, Charles J.; Johnson, Lyle R.; Palmer, John H.; and Pugh, Emerson
W. 1986. IBM’s Early Computers. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Battersby, Christine. 1989. Gender and Genius: Towards a Feminist

Aesthetics. London: Women’s Press.

Benzer, Seymour. 1962. “The Fine Structure of the Gene.” Scientific

American, January, 70.

Berenda, Carlton W. 1947. “The Determination of Past by Future Events: A
the Wheeler-Feynman Absorption-Radiation

Discussion of 
Theory.” Philosophy of Science 14:13.

Berkeley, George. 1952. The Principles of Human Knowledge. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press.

Berland, Theodore. 1962. The Scientific Life. New York: Coward-McCann.
Bernal, J. D. 1939. The Social Function of Science. New York: Macmillan.
Bernstein, Jeremy. 1967. A Comprehensible World: On Modern Science

and Its Origins. New York: Random House.

——. 1980. Hans Bethe: Prophet of Energy. New York: Basic Books.
——. 1985. “Retarded Learner: Physicist John Wheeler.” Princeton

Alumni Weekly, 9 October, 28.

——. 1987. The Life It Brings: One Physicist’s Beginnings. New York:

Ticknor and Fields.

——. 1989. The Tenth Dimension: An Informal History of High Energy

Physics. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Bethe, Hans A. 1979. “The Happy Thirties.” In Stuewer 1979, 11.
——. 1988. “Richard Phillips Feynman (1918–1988).” Nature 332:588.
Bethe, Hans A.; Bacher, Robert F.; and Livingston, M. Stanley. 1986.
Basic Bethe: Seminal Articles on Nuclear Physics, 1936–1937.
Los Angeles: Tomash/American Institute of Physics.

Bethe, Hans A., and Christy, Robert F. 1944. “Memorandum on the
Immediate After Effects of the Gadget,” March 30. LANL.
Beyer, Robert T, and Williams, Jr., A. O. 1957. College Physics.

Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Bishop, Morris. 1962. A History of Cornell. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University

Press.

Bjorken, James D. 1989. “Feynman and Partons.” Physics Today,

February, 56.

Bloch, Felix. 1976. “Reminiscences of Heisenberg and the Early Days of

Quantum Mechanics.” Physics Today, December, 23.

Blumberg, Stanley A., and Owens, Gwinn. 1976. The Life and Times of

Edward Teller. New York: Putnam.

Boden, Margaret A. 1990. The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms.

New York: Basic Books.

Bohm, David, and Peat, F. David. 1987. Science, Order, and Creativity.

New York: Bantam.

Bohr, Niels. 1922. Nobel Prize in Physics Award Address, 11 December.

In Weaver 1987, 2:315.

——. 1928. “New Problems in Quantum Theory: The Quantum Postulate

and the Recent Development of Atomic Theory.” Nature 121:580.

——. 1935. “Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be

Considered Complete?” Physical Review 48:696.

Bohr, Niels, and Wheeler, John Archibald. 1939. “The Mechanism of

Nuclear Fission.” Physical Review 56:426.

Boltzman, Ludwig. 1974. Theoretical Physics and Philosophical
Problems. Edited by Brian McGuinness. Boston: Reidel.

Bondi, Hermann. 1967. Assumption and Myth in Physical Theory.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Bonner, Francis T., and Phillips, Melba. 1957. Principles of Physical

Science. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

Born, Max. 1971. The Born-Einstein Letters: Correspondence between
Albert Einstein and Max and Hedwig Born from 1916 to 1955.
Translated by Irene Born. New York: Walker.

Bosanquet, Bernard. 1923. Three Chapters on the Nature of Mind.

London: Macmillan.

Boscovitch, Roger G. 1922. A Theory of Natural Philosophy. Translated

by J. M. Child. Chicago: Open Court.

Boslough, John. 1986. “Inside the Mind of John Wheeler.” Reader’s Digest,

September, 106.

Bowerman, Walter G. 1947. Studies in Genius. New York: Philosophical

Library.

Boyd, Richard; Gasper, Philip; and Trout, J. D., eds. 1991. The

Philosophy of Science. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Boyer, Paul. 1985. By the Bomb’s Early Light: American Thought and
Culture at the Dawn of the Atomic Age. New York: Pantheon.
Bridgman, Percy. 1950. Reflections of a Physicist. New York:

Philosophical Library.

——. 1952. The Nature of Some of Our Physical Concepts. New York:

Philosophical Library.

——. 1961. The Logic of Modern Physics. New York: Macmillan.
Briggs, John. 1988. Fire in the Crucible: The Alchemy of Creative

Genius. New York: St. Martin’s Press.

Brillouin, Leon. 1964. Scientific Uncertainty and Information. New York:

Academic Press.

Brode, Bemice. 1960. “Tales of Los Alamos.” LASL Community News, 11

August.

Broglie, Louis de. 1951. “The Concept of Time in Modern Physics and
In Bergson and the Evolution of

Bergson’s Pure Duration.” 
Physics. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press.

Bromberg, Joan. 1976. “The Concept of Particle Creation before and after
Quantum Mechanics.” Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences
7:161.

Brower, Kenneth. 1978. The Starship and the Canoe. New York: Holt,

Rinehart, and Winston.

Brown, Laurie M.; Dresden, Max; and Hoddeson, Lillian, eds. 1989. Pions
to Quarks: Particle Physics in the 1950s. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Brown, Laurie M., and Hoddeson, Lillian, eds. 1983. The Birth of Particle

Physics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Brown, 

Lawrason. 

for Recovery 
1934. Rules 
Tuberculosis. Philadelphia: Lea and Feberger.

from Pulmonary

Brownell, G. L. 1952. “Physics in South America.” Physics Today, July, 5.
Bunge, Mario. 1979. Causality and Modern Science. New York: Dover.
Cahn, Robert N., and Goldhaber, Gerson. 1989. The Experimental
Foundations of Particle Physics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Casimir, Hendrik B. G. 1983. Haphazard Reality: Half a Century of

Science. New York: Harper and Row.

Chamber of Commerce of the Rockaways. 1934. Annual Year Book of

the Rockaways.

Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan. 1987. Truth and Beauty: Aesthetics and

Motivations in Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Chase, W. Parker. 1932. New York: The Wonder City. Facsimile edition.

New York: New York Bound, 1983.

Chown, Marcus. 1989. “The Heart and Soul of Richard Feynman.” New

Scientist, 25 February, 65.

Churchland, Paul M, and Hooker, Clifford A. Images of Science. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press.

Clark, Ronald W. 1971. Einstein: The Life and Times. New York: World.
Close, F. E. 1979. An Introduction to Quarks and Partons. London:

Academic Press.

Cohen, I. Bernard, ed. 1981. The Conservation of Energy and the

Principle of Least Action. New York: Arno Press.

Cohen, I. Bernard. 1985. Revolution in Science. Cambridge, Mass.:

Belknap Press.

Cohen, Michael. 1991. “It Never Passed Him By.” Typescript.
Cohn, David L. 1943. Love in America. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Colodny, Robert G. 1965. Beyond the Edge of Certainty: Essays in
Contemporary Science and Philosophy. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice-Hall.

Compton, Arthur. 1956. Atomic Quest: A Personal Narrative. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press.

Cooper, Necia Grant. 1989. From Cardinals to Chaos: Reflections of the
Life and Legacy of Stanislaw Ulam. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Corey, C. L. 1988. Diary of a Safeman. Facsimile edition. Streamwood,

III.: National Publishing.

Crease, Robert P., and Mann, Charles C. 1986. The Second Creation.

New York: Macmillan.

Crick, Francis H. C. 1962. “The Genetic Code.” Scientific American,

October, 66.

——. 1966. “The Genetic Code: III.” Scientific American, October, 55.
Crick, Francis H. C; Barnett, Leslie; Brenner, Sydney; and Watts-Tobin, R.
J. 1961. “General Nature of the Genetic Code for Proteins.” Nature
192:1227.

Currie, Robert. 1974. Genius: An Ideology in Literature. New York:

Schocken.

Curtin , Deane W. 1980. The Aesthetic Dimension of Science. New York:

Philosophical Library.

Curtin, Deane W., ed. 1982. The Aesthetic Dimension of Science: 1980

Nobel Conference. New York: Philosophical Library.

Cvitanović, Predrag. 1983. Field Theory. Copenhagen: Nordita Classics

Illustrated.

Dalai, Siddhartha R.; Fowlkes, Edward B.; and Hoadley, Bruce. 1989.
“Risk Analysis of the Space Shuttle: Pre-Challenger Prediction of
Failure.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 84:945.

Davies, John D. 1973. “The Curious History of Physics at Princeton.”

Princeton Alumni Weekly, 2 October, 8.

Davies, P. C. W. 1974. The Physics of Time Asymmetry. Berkeley:

University of California Press.

Davis, Nuel Pharr. 1968. Lawrence and Oppenheimer. New York: Simon

and Schuster.

De Hoffmann, Frederic. 1974. “A Novel Apprenticeship.” In J. Wilson 1975,

162.

De Sitter, Willem. 1932. Kosmos. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University

Press.

Dedmon, Emmett. 1953. Fabulous Chicago. New York: Random House.
Dembart, Lee. 1983. “Nobel Prize: Another Side of the Medal.” Los

Angeles Times, 4 February, 20.

Descartes, René. 1955. The Philosophical Works of Descartes.

Translated by E. S. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross. New York: Dover.

D‘Espagnat, Bernard. 1976. Conceptual Foundations of Quantum

Mechanics. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

——. 1979. “The Quantum Theory and Reality.” Scientific American,

November, 158.

Dirac, P. A. M. 1928. “The Quantum Theory of the Electron.” Proceedings

of the Royal Society of London A117:610.

——. 1933. “The Lagrangian in Quantum Mechanics.” Physikalische

Zeitschrift der Sowjetunion 2:64. In Schwinger 1958.

——. 1935. The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Second edition.

Oxford: Clarendon Press.

——. 1946. “Elementary Particles and Their Interactions.” Typescript. PUL.
1971. The Development of Quantum Theory. J. Robert
——. 
Oppenheimer Memorial Prize Acceptance Speech. New York:
Gordon and Breach.

——. 1975. Directions in Physics. New York: Wiley and Sons.
Dobkowski, Michael N. 1979. The Tarnished Dream: Basis of American

Anti-Semitism. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press.

Dodd, J. E. 1984. The Ideas of Particle Physics. Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press.

Donnelly, Russell. 1991a. Quantized Vortices in Helium II. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

——. 199lb. “The Discovery of Superfluidity.” Manuscript.
Dresden, Max. 1987. H. A. Kramers: Between Tradition and Revolution.

New York: Springer-Verlag.

Duff, William. 1767. An Essay on Original Genius. A 

facsimile
reproduction edited with an introduction by John L. Mohoney.
Gainesville, Pa.: Scholars’ Facsimiles and Reprints, 1964.
Duga, René. 1955. A History of Mechanics. Translated by J. R. Maddox.

Neuchatel: Griffon.

Dye, Lee. 1988. “Nobel Physicist R. P. Feynman of Caltech Dies.” Los

Angeles Times, 16 February, 1.

Dyson, Freeman. 1944. “Some Guesses in the Theory of Partitions.”

Eureka 8:10.

——. 1949a. “The Radiation Theories of Tomonaga, Schwinger, and
Feynman.” Physical Review 75:486. In Schwinger 1958.

——. 1949b. “The S-Matrix in Quantum Electrodynamics.” Physical

Review 75:1736. In Schwinger 1958.

——. 1952. 

“Divergence of Perturbation Theory 

in Quantum

Electrodynamics.” Physical Review 85:631.

——. 1965a. “Tomonaga, Schwinger, and Feynman Awarded Nobel Prize

for Physics.” Science 150:588. In Weaver 1987, 1:427.

——. 1965b. “Old and New Fashions in Field Theory.” Physics Today,

June, 23.

——. 1979. Disturbing the Universe. New York: Basic Books.
——. 1980. “Manchester and Athens.” In Curtin 1980, 41.

——. 1984. Weapons and Hope. New York: Harper and Row.
——. 1987. “A Walk through Ramanujan’s Garden.” Lecture at the

Ramanujan Centenary Conference, University of Illinois, 2 June.

——. 1988a. Infinite in All Directions. New York: Harper and Row.
——. 1988b. “The Lemon and the Cream.” Talk prepared for Gemant
Award ceremonies, 25 October. Institute for Advanced Study.

——. 1989. “Feynman at Cornell.” Physics Today, February, 32.
——. 1990. “Feynman’s Proof of the Maxwell Equations.” American

Journal of Physics 58:209.

——. 1992. From Eros to Gaia. New Yoik: Pantheon.
Earman, John. 1989. World Enough and Space-Time. Cambridge,

Mass.: MIT Press.

Eddington, A. S. 1940. The Nature of the Physical World. New York:

Macmillan.

Edson, Lee. 1967. “Two Men in Search of the Quark.” New York Times

Magazine, 8 October, 54.

Einstein, Albert. 1909. “Development of Our Conception of the Nature and
Constitution of Radiation.” Physikalishe Zeitschrift 22:1909. In
Weaver 1987, 2:295.

Einstein, Albert, and Infeld, Leopold. 1938. The Evolution of Physics:
From Early Concepts to Relativity and Quanta. New York: Dover.
Erwin, G. S. 1946. A Guide for the Tuberculous Patient. New York:

Gruneand Stratton.

Far Rockaway High School. 1932. History of the Rockaways. Monograph
by the students of Far Rockaway High School. Brooklyn Historical
Society.

Feinberg, Gerald. 1977. What Is the World Made Of? The Achievements

of Twentieth Century Physics. Garden City, N.Y: Anchor Press.

Fermi, Enrico. 1932. “Quantum Theory of Radiation.” Reviews of Modern

Physics 4:87.

Fermi, Enrico, and Yang. C. N. 1949. “Are Mesons Elementary Particles?”

Physical Review 76:1739.

Fermi, Laura. 1954. Atoms in the Family: My Life with Enrico Fermi.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

——. 1971. Illustrious Immigrants: The Intellectual Migration from

Europe 1930–41. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

——. 1980. “The Fermis’ Path to Los Alamos.” In Badash et al. 1980.
Ferretti, B., ed. 1958. Annual International Conference on High Energy
Physics at CERN. Geneva, 30 June–5 July. Geneva: CERN.
Ferris, Timothy. 1988. Coming of Age in the Milky Way. New York:

Morrow.

Fine, Arthur. 1986. The Shaky Game: Einstein, Realism, and the
Quantum Theory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——. 1991. “The Natural Ontological Attitude.” In Boyd et al. 1991, 271.
Flick, Lawrence F 1903. Consumption a Curable and Preventable

Disease. Philadelphia: McKay.

Foley, H. M., and Kusch, P. 1948. “On the Intrinsic Moment of the Electron.”

Physical Review 73:412.

Forman, Paul. 1987. “Behind Quantum Electronics: National Security as a
Basis for Physical Research in the United States, 1940–1960.”
Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences 18:149.

Fox, David. 1952. “The Tiniest Time Traveler. ” Astounding Science

Fiction (magazine).

Francis, Patricia. 1989. “Science as a Way of Seeing: The Case of

Richard Feynman.” Manuscript, University of Maryland.

Franklin, Allan. 1979. “The Discovery and Nondiscovery of Parity
Nonconservation.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
10:201.

——. 1990. Experiment, Right or Wrong. Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press.

Frisch, Otto B. 1979. What Little I Remember. Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press.

Galdston, Iago. 1940. Progress in Medicine: A Critical Review of the Last

Hundred Years. New York: Knopf.

Galison, Peter Louis. 1979. “Minkowski’s Space-Time: From Visual
Thinking to the Absolute World.” Historical Studies in the Physical
Sciences 10:85.

——. 1987. How Experiments End. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Galton, Francis. 1869. Hereditary Genius: An Inquiry into Its Laws and

Consequences. New York: Horizon Press.

Gamow, George. 1966. Thirty Years That Shook Physics: The Story of

Quantum Theory. Garden City, N.Y: Doubleday.

Gardner, Martin. 1969. The Ambidextrous Universe. New York: Mentor.
——. 

1989. Hexaflexagons and Other Mathematical Diversions.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gay, Peter. 1988. Freud: A Life for Our Time. New York: Norton.
Gell-Mann, Murray. 1953. “Isotopic Spin and New Unstable Particles.”

Physical Review 92:833.

——. 1964. “A Schematic Model of Baryons and Mesons.” Physics Letters

8:214.

——. 1982. “Strangeness.” Journal de Physique 43:395.
——. 1983a. “From Renormalizability to Calculability?” In Jackiw et al.

1983, 3.

——. 1983b. “Particle Theory from S-Matrix to Quarks.” Talk presented at
the First International Congress on the History of Scientific Ideas at
Sant Feliu de Guixols, Catalunya, Spain.

——. 1989a. “Dick Feynman—The Guy Down the Hall.” Physics Today,

February, 50.

——. 1989b. Remarks at a Conference Celebrating the Birthday of Murray

Gell-Mann, 27–28 January.

Gell-Mann, Murray, and Ne’eman, Yuval. 1964. The Eightfold Way. New

York: Benjamin.

Gemant, Andrew. 1961. The Nature of the Genius. Springfield, Ill.: Charles

C. Thomas.

Gerard, Alexander. 1774. An Essay on Genius. London: Strahan.
Gieryn, Thomas F., and Figert, Anne E. 1990. “Ingredients for a Theory of
Science in Society: O-Rings, Ice Water, C-Clamp, Richard
Feynman and the New York Times.” In Theories of Science and
Society. Edited by Susan E. Cozzens and Thomas F. Gieryn.
Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press.

Gilbert, G. Nigel, and Mulkay, Michael. 1984. Opening Pandora’s Box: A
Sociological Analysis of Scientists’ Discourse. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Glashow, Sheldon. 1980. “Towards a Unified Field Theory: Threads in a

Tapestry.” Science, 19 December, 1319.

——. 1988. Interactions: A Journey through the Mind of a Particle
Physicist and the Matter of This World. With Ben Bova. New York:
Warner Books.

Gold, Thomas, ed. 1967. The Nature of Time. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell

University Press.

Goldstine, Herman H. 1972. The Computer from Pascal to Von

Neumann. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Golovin, N. E. 1963. “The Creative Person in Science.” In Taylor and Frank

1963, 7.

Goodstein, David. 1989. “Richard P. Feynman, Teacher.” Physics Today,

February, 70.

Goodstein, Judith R. 1991. Millikan’s School: A History of the California

Institute of Technology. New York: Norton.

Gould, Stephen Jay. 1981. The Mismeasure of Man. New York: Norton.
——. 1983. “Losing the Edge.” In The Flamingo’s Smile. New York:

Norton.

Grattan, C. Hartley. 1933. “Thomas Alva Edison: An American Symbol.”

Scribner’s Magazine, September, 151.

Greenberg, Daniel S. 1967. The Politics of Pure Science. New York: New

American Library.

Greenberger, Daniel M., and Overhauser, Albert W. 1980. “The Role of
Gravity in Quantum Theory.” Scientific American, May, 66.

Gregory, Bruce. 1988. Inventing Reality. New York: Wiley and Sons.
Groueff, Stephane. 1967. Manhattan Project: The Untold Story of the

Making of the Atomic Bomb. Boston: Little, Brown.
Groves, Leslie. 1975. Now It Can Be Told. New York: Da Capo.
Grünbaum, Adolph. 1963. Philosophical Problems of Space and Time.

New York: Knopf.

Hanson, Norwood Russell. 1963. The Concept of the Positron: A
Philosophical Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Harris, Theodore E. 1963. The Theory of Branching Processes.

Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Hartman, Paul. 1984. “The Cornell Physics Department: Recollections and

a History of Sorts.” Typescript. Cornell University.

Hawking, Stephen W. 1987. A Brief History of Time: From the Big Bang

to Black Holes. New York: Bantam.

Hawkins, David; Truslow, Edith C; and Smith, Ralph Carlisle. 1983.
Project Y: The Los Alamos Story. Los Angeles: Tomash.
Heidegger, Martin. 1959. An Introduction to Metaphysics. Translated by
Ralph Manheim. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Heilbron, J. L., and Seidel, Robert W. 1989. Lawrence and His
Laboratory: A History of the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

Heisenberg, Werner, ed. 1946. Cosmic Radiation: Fifteen Lectures.

Translated by T. H. Johnson. New York: Dover.
——. 1971. Physics and Beyond. New York: Harper and Row.
Hempel, Carl G. 1965. Aspects of Scientific Explanation. New York: The

Free Press.

Herbert, Nick. 1985. Quantum Reality. Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Press.
Hesse, Mary B. 1961. Forces and Fields: The Concept of Action at a

Distance in the History of Physics. London: Nelson.

Hewlett, Richard G., and Anderson, Jr., Oscar E. 1962. The New World,
1939/1946: A History of the United States Atomic Energy
Commission. Volume 1. University Park, Pa.: Pennsylvania State
University Press.

Hiley, B. J., and Peat, F. David. 1987. Quantum Implications: Essays in
Honour of David Bohm. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Hillis, W. Daniel. 1989. “Richard Feynman and the Connection Machine.”

Physics Today, February, 78.

Hofstadter, Douglas R. 1979. Gödel, Escher, Bach. New York: Basic

Books.

——. 1985. Metamagical Themas. New York: Basic Books.
——. 1991. “Thinking about Thought.” Nature 349:378.
Holton, Gerald, ed. 1965. Science and Culture. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
——. 1972. The Twentieth-Century Sciences: Studies in the Biography of

Ideas. New York: Norton.

——. 1978. The Scientific Imagination: Case Studies. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

——. 1988. Thematic Origins of Scientific Thought: Kepler to Einstein.

Revised edition. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Hood, Edwin Paxton. 1851. Genius and Industry: The Achievements of
Mind Among the Cottages. London: Partridge and Oakey.
Hudson, Liam, ed. 1970. The Ecology of Human Intelligence. London:

Penguin.

Huxley, Thomas H. 1897. Discourses: Biological and Geological Essays.

New York: Appleton.

Hyman, Anthony. 1982. Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer.

Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Infeld, Leopold. 1950. Albert Einstein: His Work and Influence on Our

World. New York: Scribner.

Jaki, Stanley L. The Relevance of Physics. Chicago: University of

Chicago Press.

Jackiw, Roman; Khuri, Nicola N.; Weinberg, Steven; and Witten, Edward,
eds. 1983. Shelter Island II: Proceedings of the 1983 Shelter
Island Conference on Quantum Field Theory and 
the
Fundamental Problems of Physics. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.

James, William. 1917. Selected Papers on Philosophy. London: Dent.
Jammer, Max. 1966. The Conceptual Development of Quantum

Mechanics. New York: McGraw-Hill.

——. 1974. The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics: The Interpretations
of Quantum Mechanics in Historical Perspective. New York:
Wiley and Sons.

Jeans, Sir James. 1943. Physics and Philosophy. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

Jette, Eleanor. 1977. Inside Box 1663. Los Alamos, N.M.: Los Alamos

Historical Society.

Johnson, Charles W., and Jackson, Charles O. 1981. City Behind a
Fence: Oak Ridge, Tennessee, 1942–1946. Knoxville: University
of Tennessee.

Jourdain, Philip E. B. 1913. The Principle of Least Action. Chicago: Open

Court.

Judson, Horace Freeland. 1979. The Eighth Day of Creation: The Makers
of the Revolution in Biology. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Jungk, Robert. 1956. Brighter Than a Thousand Suns. New York:

Harcourt.

Jungnickel, Christa; and McCormmach, Russell. 1986. The Now Mighty
Theoretical Physics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kac, Mark. 1985. Enigmas of Chance. New York: Harper and Row.
Kamen, M. D. 1985. Radiant Science, Dark Politics. Berkeley: University

of California Press.

Kargon, Robert H. 1977. “Temple to Science: Cooperative Research and
the Birth of the California Institute of Technology.” Historical
Studies in the Physical Sciences 8:3.

Kazin, Alfred. 1951. A Walker in the City. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Kevles, Daniel. 1987. The Physicists: The History of a Scientific
Community in Modern America. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press.

——. 1990. “Cold War and Hot Physics: Science, Security, and the
American State, 1945–56.” Historical Studies in the Physical
Sciences 20:239.

Klauder, John R., ed. 1972. Magic Without Magic: John Archibald

Wheeler. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.

Kragh, Helge. 1989. Dirac: A Scientific Biography. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

Kroll, Norman M., and Lamb, Willis E. 1949. “On the Self-Energy of a

Bound Electron.” Physical Review 75:388.

Kuhn, T. S. 1962. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press.

——. 1977. The Essential Tension. Chicago: University of Chicago

Press.

——. 1978. Black Body Theory and the Quantum Discontinuity, 1894–

1912. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Kunetka, James W. 1979. City of Fire. Albuquerque: University of New

Mexico Press.

Kursunoglu, Behram N., and Wigner, Eugene P. 1987. Reminiscences
about a Great Physicist: Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

La Belle, Jenijoy. 1989. “The Piper and the Physicist.” Engineering and

Science, Fall, 25.

LaFollette, Marcel C. 1990. Making Science Our Own: Public Images of
Science 1910–1955. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lamb, Willis. 1980. “The Fine Structure of Hydrogen.” In Brown and

Hoddeson 1983, 311.

Landsberg, P. T., ed. 1982. The Enigma of Time. Bristol: Adam Hilger.
Laurence, William L. 1959. Men and Atoms. New York: Simon and

Schuster.

Leighton, Ralph. 1991. Tuva or Bust! Richard Feynman’s Last Journey.

New York: Norton.

Lentricchia, Frank. 1980. After the New Criticism. Chicago: University of

Chicago.

Leplin, J., ed. 1984. Scientific Realism. Berkeley: University of California

Press.

Lewis, Gilbert N. 1930. “The Symmetry of Time in Physics.” In Landsberg

1982, 37.

Lifshitz, Eugene M. 1958. “Superfluidity.” Scientific American, June, 30.
Lindsay, Robert Bruce. 1940. General Physics for Students of Science.

New York: Wiley and Sons.

Lipset, Seymour Martin, and Ladd, Jr., Everett Carll. 1971. “Jewish
Academics in the United States.” American Jewish Yearbook, 89.

Lombroso, Cesare. 1891. The Man of Genius. London: Walter Scott.
Lopes, J. Leite. 1988. “Richard Feynman in Brazil: Recollections.”

Manuscript.

Lopes, J. Leite, and Feynman, Richard. 1952. “On the Pseudoscalar
Meson Theory of the Deuteron.” Symposium on New Research
Techniques in Physics, 251.

Macfarlane, Gwyn. 1984. Alexander Fleming: The Man and the Myth.

London: Hogarth Press.

Mach, Ernst. 1960. The Science of Mechanics: A Critical and Historical
Its Development. Translated by Thomas J.

Account of 
McCormack. Lasalle, Ill.: Open Court.

Maddox, John. 1988. “The Death of Richard Feynman.” Nature 331:653.
Mann, Thomas. 1927. The Magic Mountain. Translated by H. T. Lowe-

Porter. New York: Modern Library.

Marshak, Robert E. 1970. “The Rochester Conferences.” Bulletin of the

Atomic Scientists, June.

Masters, Dexter, and Way, Katharine, eds. 1946. One World or None: A
Report to the Public on the Full Meaning of the Atomic Bomb.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Maugham, W. Somerset. 1947. 

In Creatures of

“Sanatorium.” 

Circumstance. London: Heinemann.

Mead, Margaret. 1949. Male and Female: A Study of the Sexes in a

Changing World. New York: Morrow.

Medawar, Peter Brian. 1969. Induction and Intuition in Scientific Thought.

Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society.

Mehra, Jagdish, ed. 1973. The Physicist’s Conception of Nature.

Dordrecht: Reidel.

Mehra, Jagdish. 1988. “My Last Encounter with Richard Feynman.” Talk at

Department of Physics, Cornell University, 24 February.

Melsen, Andrew G. van. 1952. From Atomos to Atom: The History of the
Concept “Atom.” Translated by Henry J. Koren. Pittsburgh,
Duquesne University Press.

Mendenhall, C. E.; Eve, A. S,; Keys, D. A.; and Sutton, R. M. 1950.

College Physics. Boston: Heath.

Menge, Edward J. v. K. 1932. Jobs for the College Graduate in Science.

New York: Bruce.

Mermin, N. David. 1985. “Is the Moon There When Nobody Looks? Reality

and the Quantum Theory.” Physics Today, April, 38.

Merton, Robert K. 1961. “The Role of Genius in Scientific Advance.” New

Scientist 259: 306. In Hudson 1970, 70.

——. 1973. The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical

Investigations. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Metropolis, Nicholas. 1990. “The Los Alamos Experience, 1943–1954.” In

Nash 1990.

Metropolis, Nicholas, and Nelson, E. C. 1982. “Early Computing at Los

Alamos.” Annals of the History of Computing 4:348.

Michels, Walter C. 1948. “Women in Physics.” Physics Today, December,

16.

Miller, Arthur I. 1984. Imagery in Scientific Thought: Creating Twentieth-

Century Physics. Boston: Birkhäuser.

——. 1985. “Werner Heisenberg and the Beginning of Nuclear Physics.”

Physics Today, November, 60.

Millikan, Robert Andrews. 1947. Electrons (+ and –) Protons, Photons,
Neutrons, Mesotrons, and Cosmic Rays. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Millikan, Robert Andrews; Roller, Duane; and Watson, Earnest Charles.
1937. Mechanics, Molecular Physics, Heat, and Sound. Boston:
Ginn.

Mizener, Arthur. 1949. The Far Side of Paradise. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Morris, Richard. 1984. Time’s Arrows: Scientific Attitudes toward Time.

New York: Simon and Schuster.

Morrison, Philip. 1946. “If the Bomb Gets Out of Hand.” In Masters and

Way 1946.

——. 1985. Review of Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman! In Scientific

American, May, 41.

[Morrison, Philip.] 1988. “Richard P. Feynman 1918–1988.” Scientific

American, June, 38.

Morse, Philip. 1977. In at the Beginnings: A Physicist’s Life. Cambridge,

Mass.: MIT Press.

Moss, Norman. 1987. Klaus Fuchs. London: Grafton.
Murray, Francis J. 1961. Mathematical Machines. New York: Columbia

University Press.

Nash, Stephen G., ed. 1990. A History of Scientific Computing. New York:

ACM.

New Yorker. 1988. “Richard Feynman.” 14 March, 30.
Nisbet, Robert. 1980. History of the Idea of Progress. New York: Basic

Books.

Noyes, H. P.; Hafner, E. M.; Yekutieli, C; and Raz, B. J., eds. High Energy
Nuclear Physics. Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Rochester
Conference, 31 January–2 February. New York: Interscience.
Nye, Mary Jo, ed. 1984. The Question of the Atom. Los Angeles: Tomash.
Obler, Loraine K., and Fein, Deborah, eds. 1988. The Exceptional Brain:
Neuropsy-chology of Talent and Special Abilities . New York:
Guilford Press.

Ochse, R. 1990. Before the Gates of Excellence: The Determinants of

Creative Genius. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Oppenheimer, J. Robert. 1945. Speech to the Association of Los Alamos
Scientists, 2 November. In Smith and Weiner 1980, 315.

——. 1948. “Electron Theory.” In Schwinger 1958.
Osgood, Charles G., ed. 1947. The Modern Princeton. Princeton:

Princeton University Press.

Osgood, Charles G. 1951. Lights in Nassau Hall. Princeton: Princeton

University Press.

Pais, Abraham. 1982. “Subtle Is the Lord”: The Science and the Life of

Albert Einstein. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

——. 1986. Inward Bound. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——. 1991. Niels Bohr’s Times, in Physics, Philosophy, and Polity.

Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Park, David. 1988. The How and the Why. Princeton: Princeton University

Press.

Peierls, Rudolf. 1985. Bird of Passage. Princeton: Princeton University

Press.

Perutz, Max. 1989. Is Science Necessary? Oxford: Oxford University

Press.

Pickering, Andrew. 1984. Constructing Quarks: A Sociological History of
Particle Physics. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Polkinghorne, John C. 1980. Models of High Energy Processes.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

——. 1989. Rochester Roundabout: The Story of High Energy Physics.

New York: W. H. Freeman.

——. 1990. “Chaos and Cosmos: A Theological Approach.” Talk at Nobel

Symposium, St. Peter, Minn.

Pollard, Ernest C. 1982. Radiation: One Story of the MIT Radiation

Laboratory. Durham, N.C.: Woodbum Press.

Popper, Karl. 1958. The Logic of Scientific Discovery. London:

Hutchinson.

Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident.
1986. Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space
Shuttle Challenger Accident. Washington, D.C.

Princeton University. 1946. The Future of Nuclear Science. Princeton

University Bicentennial Conferences: Series I, Conference I.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Putnam, Hilary. 1965. “A Philosopher Looks at Quantum Mechanics.” In

Colodny 1965, 75.

Quine, W. V. 1969. Ontological Relativity. New York: Columbia University

Press.

——. 1987. Quiddities: An Intermittently Philosophical Dictionary.

Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press.

Rabi, Isidor Isaac. 1970. Science: The Center of Culture. New York:

World.

Regis, Ed. 1987. Who Got Einstein’s Office?: Eccentricity and Genius at
the Institute for Advanced Study. Reading, Mass.: Addison
Wesley.

——. 1990. Great Mambo Chicken and the Transhuman Condition.

Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

Reichenbach, Hans. 1956. The Direction of Time. Berkeley: University of

California Press.

Reid, Hiram Alvin. 1895. History of Pasadena. Pasadena: Pasadena

History Company.

Reid, R. W. 1969. Tongues of Conscience: Weapons Research and the

Scientists’ Dilemma. New York: Walker and Company.

Reid, T. R. 1984. The Chip: How Two Americans Invented the Microchip
and Launched a Revolution. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Reingold, Nathan, and Reingold, Ida H., eds. 1981. Science in America: A
Documentary History 1900–1919. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Rhodes, Richard. 1987. The Making of the Atomic Bomb. New York:

Simon and Schuster.

Rigden, John S. 1987. Rabi: Scientist and Citizen. New York: Basic

Books.

Riordan, Michael. 1987. The Hunting of the Quark. New York: Simon and

Schuster.

Root-Bernstein, Robert Scott. 1989. Discovering: Inventing and Solving
Problems at the Frontiers of Scientific Knowledge. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Sakharov, Andrei. 1990. Memoirs. Translated by Richard Lourie. New

York: Knopf.

Salam, Abdus, and Strathdee, J. 1972. “The Path-Integral Quantization of
Gravity.” In Aspects of Quantum Theory. Edited by Abdus Salam
and E. P. Wigner. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Sanchez, George I. 1961. Arithmetic in Maya.
Scheid, Ann. 1986. Pasadena: Crown of the Valley. Northridge, Calif.:

Windsor.

Schlossberg, David. 1988. Tuberculosis. Second edition. New York:

Springer-Verlag.

Schrödinger, Erwin. 1967. What Is Life? Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press.

Schucking, Engelbert L. 1990. “Views from a Distant Past.” In General
Relativity and Gravitation 1989. Edited by Neil Ashby.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Schwartz, Joseph. 1992. The Creative Moment: How Science Made Itself

Alien to Modern Culture. New York: HarperCollins.

Schweber, Silvan S. 1983. “A Short History of Shelter Island I.” In Jackiw et

al. 1983, 301.

——. 1986a. “Feynman and the Visualization of Space-Time Processes.”

Reviews of Modern Physics, 58:449.

——. 1986b. “The Empiricist Temper Regnant: Theoretical Physics in the
United States 1920–1950.” Historical Studies in the Physical and
Biological Sciences 17:1.

——. 1986c. “Shelter Island, Pocono, and Oldstone: The Emergence of
American Quantum Electrodynamics after World War II.” Osiris
2:265.

——. 1989. “The Young Slater and the Development of Quantum
Chemistry.” Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological
Sciences 20:339

——. Forthcoming. QED: 1946–1950: An American Success Story.

Manuscript.

Schwinger, Julian. 1934. “On the Interaction of Several Electrons.”

Typescript. Courtesy of Schwinger.

——, ed. 1958. Selected Papers on Quantum Electrodynamics. New

York: Dover.

——. 1973. “A Report on Quantum Electrodynamics.” In Mehra 1973, 413.
——. 1983. “Renormalization Theory of Quantum Electrodynamics: An

Individual View.” In Brown and Hoddeson 1983.

——. 1989. “A Path to Quantum Electrodynamics.” Physics Today,

February, 42.

Segrè, Emilio. 1970. Enrico Fermi: Physicist. Chicago: University of

Chicago.

——. 1980. From X-Rays to Quarks: Modern Physicists and Their

Discoveries. Berkeley, Calif.: W. H. Freeman.

Sharpe, William. 1755. A Dissertation Upon Genius. Reprint, with
introduction by William Bruce Johnson. Delmar, N.Y.: Scholars’
Facsimiles and Reprints, 1973.

Sheppard, R. Z. 1985. “The Wonderful Wizard of Quark.” Time, 7 January,

91.

Shryock, Richard Harrison. 1947. The Development of Modern Medicine.

New York: Knopf.

Shuttle Criticality Review Hazard Analysis Audit Committee. 1988. PostChallenger Evaluation of Space Shuttle Risk Assessment and
Management. Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Sciences
Press.

Silberman, Charles E. 1985. A Certain People: American Jews and Their

Lives Today. New York: Summit.

Simonton, Dean Keith. 1984. Genius, Creativity, and Leadership:
Historiometric Inquiries. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.

——. 1989. Scientific Genius. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sitwell, Edith. 1943. Street Songs. London: Macmillan.
——. 1987. Façade. London: Duckworth.
Sklar, Lawrence. 1974. Space, Time, and Spacetime. Berkeley:

University of California Press.

Slater, John C. 1955. Modern Physics. New York: McGraw-Hill.
——. 1963. Quantum Theory of Molecules and Solids. Vol. 1. New York:

McGraw-Hill.

——. 1975. Solid-State and Molecular Theory: A Scientific Biography.

New York: Wiley and Sons.

Slater, John C, and Frank, Nathaniel H. 1933. Introduction to Theoretical

Physics. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Smith, Alice Kimball. 1965. A Peril and a Hope: The Scientists’
Movement in America 1945–47. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Smith, Alice Kimball, and Weiner, Charles. 1980. Robert Oppenheimer:
Letters and Reflections. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.

Smith, Cyril Stanley. 1981. A Search for Structure. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT

Press.

Smith, F. B. 1988. The Retreat of Tuberculosis 1850–1950. London:

Croom Helm.

Smyth, H. D. 1945. Atomic Energy for Military Purposes. Princeton:

Princeton University Press.

Smyth, H. D., and Wilson, Robert R. 1942. “The Isotron Method.” Isotron

Report no. 18, 20 August. SMY.

Snow, C. P. 1981. The Physicists. Boston: Little, Brown.
Solomon, Saul. 1952. Tuberculosis. New York: Coward-McCann.
Sopka, Katherine Russell. 1980. Quantum Physics in America: 1920–

1935. New York: Arno Press.

Stabler, Howard P. 1967. “Teaching from Feynman.” Physics Today,

March, 47.

Starr, Kevin. 1985. Inventing the Dream: California through the

Progressive Era. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Steinberg, Stephen. 1971. “How Jewish Quotas Began.” Commentary,

September.

Stigler, George. 1985. “Sex and the Single Physicist.” Wall Street Journal,

3 May, 21.

Storch, Sylvia. 1966. “A Nobel-Prize Winner Comes Home.” Highpoints

(Board of Education of the City of New York), June, 5.

Stückelberg, E. C. G. 1941. “Remarque à propos de la Création de Paires
de Particules en Théorie de Relativité.” Helvetica Physica Acta
14:588.

Stuewer, Roger H. 1975. “G. N. Lewis on Detailed Balancing, the

Symmetry of Time, and the Nature of Light.” Historical Studies in
the Physical Sciences 6:469.

Stuewer, Roger H., ed. 1979. Nuclear Physics 

in Retrospect:
Proceedings of a Symposium on the 1930s. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.

Sudarshan, E. C. G. 1983. “Midcentury Adventures in Particle Physics.” In

Brown et al. 1989, 40.

Sudarshan, E. C. G, and Marshak, Robert E. 1984. “Origin of the V-A
Theory.” Talk at International Conference on Fifty Years of Weak
Interactions, Racine, Wis., 29 May–1 June.

Sudarshan, E. C. G., and Ne’eman, Yuval, eds. 1973. The Past Decade in

Particle Theory. London: Gordon and Breach.

Sudarshan, E. C. G.; Tinlot, J. H.; and Melissinos, A. C., eds. 1960.
Proceedings of the 1960 Annual International Conference on
High Energy Physics at Rochester. 25 August–1 September. New
York: Interscience.

Taylor, Calvin, and Barron, Frank, eds. 1963. Scientific Creativity: Its
Recognition and Development. New York: Wiley and Sons.
Taylor, J. C. 1976. Gauge Theories of Weak Interactions. Cambridge:

Cambridge University Press.

Teich, Malvin C. 1986. “An Incessant Search for New Approaches.”

Physics Today, September, 61.

Telegdi, Valentine L. 1972. 

“Crucial Experiments on Discrete

Symmetries.” In Mehra 1973, 457.

Teller, Michael E. 1988. The Tuberculosis Movement: A Public Health
Campaign in the Progressive Era. New York: Greenwood Press.

Tobey, Ronald C. 1971. The American Ideology of National Science

1919–1930. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.

Tomonaga, Shin’ichiro. 1966. “Development of Quantum Electrodynamics:
Personal Recollections.” In Nobel Lectures: Physics 1963–1970.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Torretti, Roberto. 

1990. Creative Understanding: Philosophical

Reflections on Physics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Toulmin, Stephen. 1953. The Philosophy of Science. New York: Harper

and Row.

Traweek, Sharon. 1988. Beamtimes and Lifetimes: The World of High

Energy Physicists. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Tricker, R. A. R. 1966. The Contributions of Faraday and Maxwell to

Electrical Science. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

Trigg, George L. 1975. Landmark Experiments in Twentieth Century

Physics. New York: Crane, Russak.

Ulam, Stanislaw M. 1976. Adventures of a Mathematician. New York:

Scribner.

Underwood, E. Ashworth. 1937. Manual of Tuberculosis for Nurses and
Public Health Workers. Second edition. Edinburgh: E. & S.
Livingstone.

Von Neumann, John. 1955. Mathematical Foundations of Quantum

Mechanics. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Waksman, Selman A. 1964. The Conquest of Tuberculosis. Berkeley:

University of California Press.

Watson, James D. 1968. The Double Helix. New York: Atheneum.
Weart, Spencer R. 1988. Nuclear Fear: A History of Images. Cambridge,

Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Weaver, Jefferson Hane, ed. 1987. The World of Physics. 3 volumes. New

York: Simon and Schuster.

Weinberg, Steven. 1977a. “The Search for Unity: Notes for a History of

Quantum Field Theory.” Daedalus 106:17.

——. 1977b. The First Three Minutes: A Modern View of the Origin of the

Universe. New York: Basic Books.

——. 1981. “Einstein and Spacetime: Then and Now.” Proceedings of the

American Philosophical Society 125:20.

——. 1987. “Towards the Final Laws of Physics.” In Feynman and

Weinberg 1987, 61.

Weisskopf, Victor F. 1947. “Foundations of Quantum Mechanics: Outline

of Topics for Discussion.” Typescript. OPP.

——.1980. “Growing Up with Field Theory: The Development of Quantum

Electrodynamics.” In Brown and Hoddeson 1983, 56.

——. 1991. The Joy of Insight: Passions of a Physicist. New York: Basic

Books.

Welton, T. A. 1983. “Memories.” Manuscript. CIT.

Weyl, Hermann. 1922. Space—Time—Matter. Translated by Henry L.

Brose. New York: Dover.

——. 1949. Philosophy of Mathematics and Natural Science. Princeton:

Princeton University Press.

——. 1952. Symmetry. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Wheeler, John Archibald. 1948. “Conference on Physics: Pocono Manor,

Pennsylvania, 30 March–1 April, 1948.” Mimeographed notes.

——. 1979a. “Some Men and Moments in the History of Nuclear Physics.”

In Stuewer 1979, 217.

——. 1979b. “Beyond the Black Hole.” In Woolf 1980, 341.
——. 1985 “Not Consciousness, but the Distinction between the Probe
and the Probed, as Central to the Elemental Quantum Act of
Observation.” Lecture at the annual meeting of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science, 8 January.

——. 1989. “The Young Feynman.” Physics Today, February, 24.
Wheeler, John Archibald, and Ruffini, Remo. 1971. “Introducing the Black

Hole.” Physics Today, 24.

Wheeler, John Archibald, and Wigner, Eugene P. 1942. Report of the
Readers of Richard P. Feynman’s Thesis on “The Principle of
Least Action in Quantum Mechanics.” Typescript, PUL.

Wheeler, John Archibald, and Zurek, Wojciech Hibert. 1983. Quantum
Theory and Measurement. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
White, D. Hywel; Sullivan, Daniel; and Barboni, Edward J. 1979. “The
Interdependence of Theory and Experiment in Revolutionary
Science: The Case of Parity Violation.” Social Studies of Science
9:303.

Whitrow, G. J. 1980. The Natural Philosophy of Time. Oxford: Clarendon

Press.

Wiener, Norbert. 1956. I Am a Mathematician: The Later Life of a

Prodigy. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday.

Wigner, Eugene P., ed. 1947. Physical Science and Human Values.
Princeton Bicentennial Conference on the Future of Nuclear
Science. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Williams, L. Pearce. 1966. The Origins of Field Theory. New York:

Random House.

Williams, Michael R. 1985. A History of Computing Technology .

Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

Williams, Robert Chadwell. 1987. Klaus Fuchs, Atom Spy. Cambridge,

Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Wilson, Jane, ed. 1975. All in Our Time: The Reminiscences of Twelve
Nuclear Pioneers. Chicago: Educational Foundation for Nuclear
Sciences.

Wilson, Robert R. 1942. “Isotope Separator: General Description.” Isotron

Report no. 1. SMY.

——. 1958. Review of Brighter Than a Thousand Suns. In Scientific

American, December, 145.

——. 1972. “My Fight Against Team Research.” In Holton 1972, 468.
——. 1974. “A Recruit for Los Alamos.” In J. Wilson 1975, 142.
Woolf, Harry, ed. 1980. Some Strangeness in the Proportion: A
Centennial Symposium to Celebrate the Achievements of Albert
Einstein. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.

Wright, Kenneth W.; Monroe, James; and Beck, Frederick. 1990. “A
History of the Ray Brook State Tuberculosis Hospital.” New York
State Journal of Medicine 90, 406.

Yang, Chen Ning. 1957. “The Law of Parity Conservation and Other
Symmetry Laws in Physics.” Nobel lecture, 11 December 1957. In
Nobel Lectures: Physics. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1964.

——. 1962. Elementary Particles: A Short History of Some Discoveries
in Atomic Physics. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
——. 1983. “Particle Physics in the Early 1950s.” In Brown et al. 1989, 40.
Yang, Chen Ning.; Cole, J. A.; Good, M.; Hwa, R.; and Lee-Franzini, J.,
International
1969. High Energy Collisions: Third 

eds. 
Conference. London: Gordon and Breach.

Yukawa, Hideki. 1973. Creativity and Intuition: A Physicist Looks East
and West. Translated by John Bester. Tokyo: Kodansha.
Zeman, Jin, ed. 1971. Time in Science and Philosophy. Amsterdam:

Elsevier.

Ziman, John. 1978. Reliable Knowledge: An Exploration of the Grounds

for Belief in Science. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

——. 1992. “Unknotting Epistemology.” Nature 355:408.

Zuckerman, Harriet. 1977. Scientific Elite: Nobel Laureates in the United

States. New York: The Free Press.

Zurek, Wojciech Hubert; van der Merwe, Alwyn; and Miller, Warner Allen,
eds. 1988. Between Quantum and Cosmos: Studies and Essays
in Honor of John Archibald Wheeler. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Zweig, George. 1981. “Origins of the Quark Model.” In Baryon ’80:
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Baryon
Resonances. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

INDEX

Aberdeen Proving Ground (Md.), 182
absorber theory, see Wheeler-Feynman electrodynamics
action, 59–61, 131–32, 226, 229, 247–48. See also least action, principle

of Planck’s constant and, 71
action at a distance, 101–2, 128
 Aldrich, Arnold, 419–20
algebra, 29–30, 33–34, 36, 183, 362, 401
Alice in Wonderland (Carroll), 124
Alpert, Richard, 406
American Broadcasting Corporation, 378
American Museum of Natural History (New York), 25
American Physical Society, 53
 meetings, 40, 117, 252, 270, 301, 354–55, 411–12
Ampère, Andrè-Marie, 320
analogy, 404
Anderson, Carl, 81, 253
anthropology, 287, 290
antigravity, 295, 407
antimatter, 7, 122, 253–54, 305, 334, 407
and time reversal, 82, 123, 258, 272–73
anti-Semitism, 23, 49, 53, 62, 84–85, 167, 233
Archimedes, 315
Aristotle, 359
Armstrong, Neil, 417, 423
Army, United States, 137, 182, 414–15
 Feynman as consultant, 295
 Los Alamos and, 161, 187, 192–93, 198–99
 Oppenheimer and, 158–59
 secrecy and, 166, 169
Ashkin, Julius, 192
Associated Press, 378

astrology, 373–74
athletics, 327–28
atom, 36–39, 58–59, 114. See also hydrogen; uranium
 models of, 5, 71–72, 95, 99, 241–43
 nucleus, 9, 79–80, 89–90, 130, 264, 307, 392
atomic bomb. See also Los Alamos
 Bethe-Feynman formula, 6, 168
 chain reaction, 161–63, 172–73, 197
 computation, 175–82, 201
 dragon experiment, 196
 effect on physics, 4, 203, 207–11, 216, 232, 294–95, 376, 431
 guilt over, 3, 156, 203, 207–9, 213, 263–64
 Hiroshima, 156, 203–4, 210, 218, 237, 263
 isotron project, 139–45
 Nagasaki, 156, 203, 210
 official history, 164
 origins of, 95, 136, 139
 postwar consequences of, 156, 207–11, 213, 218, 233, 278, 294–95,

340, 431

 practical difficulties, 163–65, 170–73, 181
 predetonation, 6, 168–69
 radioactivity, 197–99
 Russian, 278, 297–98
 space travel and, 218–19
 theorists’ role, 155, 163–65, 173–74, 181
 Trinity test, 6, 65–66, 153–57, 203
atomic energy, 218, 339
Atomic Energy Commission, 209, 211, 277, 295–96
AT&T Bell Laboratories, see Bell Telephone Laboratories
Auden, W. H., 7–8
aurora borealis, 27, 436, 437

Baade, Walter, 293
Baba Ram Das, see Alpert, Richard
Babbage, Charles, 180
Bacher, Robert F., 210–11, 277–78, 338

Bacon, Francis, 429
Bacon, Roger, 68, 314
bacteria, 349–51
Bader, Abram, 60–61, 362
Bainbridge, Kenneth, 155
Barber, Edwin, 411 n
Bardeen, John, 303
Barschall, Heinz, 96
Bartkey, Walter, 293
Baudelaire, Charles-Pierre, 318
Bayside Cemetery (New York), 26, 220–21
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 318
Beggs, James, 421, 427
Bell, Alexander Graham, 40, 319
Bell, Mary Louise (second wife), 287, 291–94
Bell Telephone Laboratories, 85, 137–38, 182, 354
Bergman, Ingrid, 223
Bernal, J. D., 315–16
Bernoulli, Daniel, 39
Bernstein, Jeremy, 277
Besicovitch, A. S., 236
beta decay, 272, 309, 330–39
Bethe, Hans, 53, 176–78, 216, 233, 255–59, 287, 386
 background, 166–67, 289
 consulting, 223
 at Cornell, 204–5, 226–28, 269–70, 277, 278, 293–94
 and Dyson, 235, 238–39, 266–67
 and Feynman, 165–66, 169, 184, 212, 241, 249, 262, 296
 as genius, 322
 Lamb shift calculation, 239–40, 251–52
 at Los Alamos, 165–69, 171, 173, 180, 198, 202–3
 mental arithmetic, 14–15, 175–77
 Nobel Prize, 377
 nuclear physics, 80, 167
 physical intuition, 166–67, 305
 prewar research, 138

 renormalization, 239–40, 252
 Schwinger and, 216
Bethe, Henry, 241
Bethe, Rose, 202, 289
Bethe-Feynman formula, 6, 168
Bhagavad Gita, 155
Bhopal chemical disaster, 416
 bikini, 339
 bird watching, 28–29, 308, 388
Birge, Raymond T., 85, 184, 204
Bjorken, James D., 393–94
black hole, 93, 353
Blake, William, 318
Block, Martin, 333, 335
Bohr, Aage, 258
Bohr, Niels, 5, 10, 15, 41, 130, 243–44, 279–80, 292
 atomic model, 38, 71–72, 99, 242
 complementarity, 40, 54, 247
 criticism of Feynman, 8, 226, 258
 as genius, 322
 liquid-drop model, 95, 139
 at Los Alamos, 8, 257
 Nobel Prize, 376
 at Pocono, 5, 8, 255–58
 Wheeler and, 93–95
Bondi, Hermann, 125–26
 bootstrap model, 369–70
Boscovich, Ruggiero, 39
Boyle, Robert, 38–39
Braun, Wernher von, 414
Brazil
 appeal to Americans, 278
 Feynman in, 278, 282–87, 337, 341
 physics in, 278, 283–84
Brewster’s Law, 283
Bridgman, Percy, 101

Broglie, Louis de, 73
Bronk, Detlev W., 383–84
Brookhaven National Laboratory for Nuclear Research, 53, 209

Cahn, Judah, 219–21
calculating, mental, 9–10, 33–36, 175–78, 328–29
calculating machines, 83, 124, 138, 176, 179–82, 355
California Institute of Technology, 281–82
 Atheneum, 388
 cafeteria, 12, 388
cosmic ray research, 81, 253
Einstein at, 281
Engineering and Science, 355–56
Feynman at, 277–78, 282–83, 293–94, 311, 338, 340–41, 349, 357–63,

379, 398, 404, 406–7, 412, 435, 437
 Gell-Mann at, 311, 338, 340–41, 407
 genetics, 349–51
 government financing, 386, 406
 growth of, 277, 281–82
 Kellogg Radiation Laboratory, 282
 liquid helium experiments, 302
 nuclear physics, 281
 physics colloquium, 404
 physics teaching, 12, 277, 295, 357–63, 404–405
 Physics X, 12, 398, 417
women at, 412
California, University of, at Berkeley, 53, 85, 130, 136, 141, 143, 163, 166,

184, 204, 209, 210, 216, 255–56

Cambridge University, 53, 159, 166, 236, 238, 315, 317
Case, Kenneth, 270–72, 282
Catskill Mountains (New York), 28
causality, 7, 40, 54, 70–72, 109, 112, 243, 365–66, 371
Cedarhurst (New York), 20–21, 23, 26, 45, 151
Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Fisicas, 278, 283–84
“Century of Progress” (1933 World’s Fair), 40–42
CERN (European Center for Nuclear Research), 381, 383

Challenger (space shuttle), 11, 145, 415–28
 background, 425
 investigating commission, 416–17
 launch, 415–16
 O-rings, 418–23, 427–28
 risk assessment, 427–28
Chandrasekhar, Subrahmanyan, 316
chaos, 119, 182, 360, 430–31, 435–36
Character of Physical Law, 13, 364–71
Chaucer, 235
chemistry, 38–39, 67, 79, 86–90, 99, 264
quantum, 40, 87
Chicago, University of, 10, 41, 141, 146, 157–58, 161, 164, 282, 309, 386
 honorary degree offer, 384
 recruiting of Feynman, 294
Christian Century, 207
Citizen Kane (Welles), 236
City College of New York, 48, 215
clouds, 22, 80–81, 154
Cobb, Ty, 327
Cohn, David L., 192 n
Coleman, Sidney, 10 n, 323–24, 389, 405
color (light), 130, 131, 321, 357, 362
color (particle property), 229, 387, 390, 402–3, 432
Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School (New York), 307, 309
Columbia University, 49, 144, 180, 252, 267, 309, 334, 337, 384
Rabi at, 53, 91, 232, 234
Schwinger at, 215–16
Commerce, Department of, United States, 296
complementarity, 40, 54
Compton, Karl, 55, 94, 138
computing, 6, 175–82, 329, 348, 354–55, 435
 analog, 137
 ENIAC, 182
Condon, Edward, 54–55
consciousness, 68–69, 123–24, 243, 321, 431

continental drift, 321
Cook, Richard, 423–24
Coolidge, Albert Sprague, 85
Cooper, Leon, 303
Copyright Office, United States, 328
Coriolis force, 37
Cornell University, 3, 53, 123
 Bethe at, 53, 80, 166, 225–27, 238, 277
 Dyson at, 7, 238–39
 Feynman at, 10, 204, 214–22, 225–27, 263, 277–78, 286, 288, 293–

94, 365

 postwar growth, 210–12, 221
 women at, 212
cosmic rays, 81–82, 98, 114, 168, 215, 253, 304, 332
cosmology, 112–14, 123–26, 293, 353–54
Crease, Robert, 433–34 n
Crick, Francis, 349, 351, 382
current algebra, 328, 338, 393
Cutler, Monarch, 82–83
Cvitanović, Predrag, 279–80 n
cyclotron, 95–96, 107–8, 136, 160, 210–11, 305–6

Daghlian, Harry, 196
Darwin, Charles, 207
Dawes, Rufus C, 41
Day, Edmund Ezra, 210
Delbrück, Max, 293, 340, 349
Depression, 41, 46, 53, 55, 77, 281, 308
Descartes, René, 58–59, 67–68
diffusion, 79, 80, 171–75, 182, 249
 and entropy, 119
 in uranium separation, 139–40, 144
DiMaggio, Joe, 328
Dirac, Paul Adrien Maurice
 antimatter, 122, 253
 at Cambridge, 53–54, 166, 236

 Feynman and, 7, 184, 226, 228–29, 437
 as genius, 43–44, 322
 history of quantum mechanics, 72–73
 Lagrangian in quantum mechanics, 128–29, 131–32, 226
 parity and, 334
 at Pocono, 5, 7, 255–58
 The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, 56, 76, 99–100, 260
 religion and, 58
 renormalization and, 347–49
 Schwinger and, 48–49
 Slater and, 53–54
Dirac equation, 5, 73, 229–30, 234, 261–62, 336–38
 discovery, 284, 313–14, 321
 individual vs. multiple, 329
 myths of, 279, 315, 380
DNA, 14, 293, 349–351, 355, 386
Dr. Strangelove (Kubrick), 156
Don Juan, 319
Double Helix, The (Watson), 386
DuBridge, Lee, 295, 415
Duff, William, 313
Dyson, Freeman J., 298
 background, 235–38
 at Cornell, 235, 238
 Feynman and, 3–4, 7, 240–41, 244, 249–51, 262–66, 273, 323, 368,

 genius and, 317, 320–21, 323, 328
 Nobel Prize, 377–78
 Oppenheimer and, 269–70
 quantum electrodynamics, 239–40, 252, 259, 263, 266–72, 274, 279–

80, 307, 309, 348, 367
 Schwinger and, 261, 266–68, 271
Dyson, George, 235, 267
Dyson, Mildred, 235–36
Dyson graph, 269, 273

earthquake science, 281–82
Eastman, George, 55
Eddington, Arthur, 52, 75, 109, 433
Edgerton, Harold, 77
Edison, Thomas Alva, 40–44, 54–55, 319–20, 329
Einstein, Albert, 5, 9–10, 45, 54, 56, 70, 112, 120, 123, 129, 209, 244,

264, 281, 324, 386, 433–34

 atomic bomb, 136
 Bohr and, 40
 brain, 311–12
 ether, 18, 101–2
 Feynman and, 98, 115, 117, 118–19, 257
 legend, 41–44, 311–13, 320–22, 326
 Nobel Prize, 375–77
 photoelectric effect, 71, 377
 on Princeton, 97
 on quantum mechanics, 40, 45, 215, 243, 347
 relativity, 42–43, 71, 72, 255, 329, 351–52, 365, 368, 375, 429–30
 religion and, 58, 372
 retirement, 118–19
 Einstein Award, 295–96, 343, 378–79
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 296, 297, 340
electric light, 319, 329
electricity, 320
electron, 4, 5, 33, 71–73, 79, 86, 114, 122–23, 127, 231–32, 283, 306
 -electron interaction, 48–49, 273
 -neutron interaction, 270–71
 -photon interaction, 241–42, 246
 -positron interaction, 253–54
 -proton interaction, 391–95
 in beta decay, 335–37
 magnetic moment, 251–52
 reality of, 375
 self-energy, 99–102, 109–12, 239–40, 251–52, 256, 273–75, 380
 in solids, 88–90, 349
 spin, 229–31, 239

 two-slit experiment, 247–48, 250, 366
electron microscope, 38, 355
electroweak theory, 431
Encyclopaedia Britannica, 25, 38, 49, 286, 354–55
energy, 31, 38–39
 conservation of, 60, 88, 139, 330, 360–61
 force vs., 87–89, 226
 gravity waves and, 352
 infinite, 49, 99, 253
 kinetic and potential, 60–61, 121
 mass and, 4, 42
 negative, 122, 253
 quantum mechanics and, 71–72, 74, 127
 textbooks and, 398
Engineering and Science, 355–56
ENIAC, 182
entropy, 355, 362–63, 435
Erhard, Werner, 405–6
Esalen Institute, 407
est Foundation, 405
ether, 18, 42, 48, 101
Ethical Culture School (New York), 24, 159
Euclid, 34, 41, 121
evolution, 31–32, 208, 332
exclusion principle, 6–7, 255, 258
explanation, 357, 364–75
Explorer satellites, 415–16

Far Rockaway (New York), 20–24, 45–49, 64, 98, 126, 191, 409
 Temple Israel, 219, 296
Far Rockaway High School, 30–36, 60–61, 302
 Young People’s Socialist League, 296
Faraday, Michael, 101
Faulkner, William, 380
Faust (Goethe), 52, 66, 208, 236
Federal Bureau of Investigation, 296–97

Fermat, Pierre de, 57–58, 61, 250
Fermat’s last theorem, 267
Fermi, Enrico, 305, 309
 calculating ability, 175
 death, 294
 Feynman and, 282–83
 as genius, 322
 “lightness of approach,” 166–67
 nuclear reactor, 146, 157, 161
 nuclear research, 79, 95, 173
 at Pocono, 5, 255–57
 Schwinger and, 216
 at Trinity, 155, 203
Fermi-Dirac statistics, 399
Fermi interaction, see weak interaction
Feynman, Anne (paternal grandmother), 24
Feynman, Arline Greenbaum (first wife), 45–46, 64–65, 67, 69, 91, 116–
17, 146, 184–88, 206, 212–14, 221–22, 264, 287, 289, 290, 343,
409–10

 illness, 117, 126–27, 134–35, 149–51, 159–60, 170, 191–96, 200–

 marriage, 149–51
Feynman, Carl (son), 346, 378, 396–98, 405, 409, 435
Feynman, Gweneth Howarth (third wife), 340–47, 353, 378, 401–2, 405,

408, 426, 438

Feynman, Henry Phillips (brother), 25–26, 46, 221
Feynman, Joan (sister), 16, 19, 26–27, 30, 40–42, 46, 64, 135, 194–95,

202, 220–21, 335–36, 438

Feynman, Louis (paternal grandfather), 24
Feynman, Lucille (née Phillips, mother), 15, 19, 23, 24–26, 27–28, 32, 40–
42, 46, 115, 149–51, 156, 159, 169, 182–83, 201, 213–14, 220–21,
263, 293, 346, 378–79, 397

Feynman, Mary Louise (second wife), see Bell,
Mary Louise
Feynman, Melville (father), 22, 24–26, 27–31, 40–42, 46, 68, 91, 126, 133,

149–51, 169, 176, 186, 214, 219–22, 242, 379, 388, 410

Feynman, Michelle (daughter), 346, 396–98, 401, 408, 437
Feynman, Richard Phillips
 “aggressive dopiness,” 405
 ambition, 34, 170, 265–66
 atomic bomb and, 3, 6, 11, 15, 140, 153–205, 213, 216, 218, 224–25,

263–64, 417

 awards, 295–96, 343, 375–86
 beaches and, 21–22, 283–87, 339, 401
 beauty and, 13, 373, 435
 birth, 25
 books, 11–13
 The Character of Physical Law, 13, 364–71
 The Feynman Lectures on Physics, 12, 21–22, 37–38, 145, 357–

64, 407, 435–36

 Photon-Hadron Interactions, 395
 QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter, 13
 Quantum Electrodynamics, 12
 Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman!, 11, 409–11
 Theory of Fundamental Processes, 12
 What Do You Care What Other People Think?, 11
 calculating ability, 9–10, 14–15, 33–36, 60, 175–78
 California Institute of Technology and, 277–78, 282–83, 293–94, 311,

338, 340–41, 349, 398, 404, 406–7, 435, 437

 Challenger and, 11, 145, 415–28
 childhood, 17–49
 children, 346, 378, 396–98, 401, 405, 408–9, 435, 437
 college admission, 49
 consulting, 223, 295, 406, 434
 at Cornell, 3, 10, 204, 214–22, 225–27, 277–78, 286, 288, 293–94,

 culture and, 14, 32, 65, 83, 185, 285–87, 292
 diagrams and, 7–8, 11, 17, 104, 130–31
 divorce, 293
 draft status, 222–25, 297
 dreams, 69–70

 drugs and, 14, 406
 education, 30–36, 55–56, 60–61
 as educator, 12, 98, 216–18, 262, 278–79, 357–60, 397–401
 examinations, 30, 49, 52, 65, 66, 83–84, 130
 Gell-Mann and, 11, 310–11, 315, 332–39, 346–47, 354, 367, 387–89,

411, 434
 graduation, 91–92, 148
 honorary degrees, 148, 384
 illness, 401–4, 408, 410, 417, 437–38
 investigation of, 296–97
 irresponsibility, 181, 200, 386, 388
 lecturing, 114–15
 marriages, 151, 292, 346
 Mexico house, 379, 402
money and, 98, 192, 349, 406–7
 Nobel Prize, 9, 49, 375–83
“Notebook of Things I Don’t Know About,”130
obituary, 437
 parents and, 25–30, 91, 149–51, 215–16, 220–21
 patents of, 15, 218
 physical intuition, 131, 142, 243–45, 302–3, 325–26
 poetry and, 7–8, 31–32, 69, 105, 244, 373–74, 412–13, 436–37
 politics, 292, 297
 psychiatry and, 223–25
 radios and, 17–19, 46–47
 rationality, 70, 115–16, 220–22
 religion and, 22–23, 31–32, 65, 84–85, 115, 220–21, 372–73
 reputation, 3, 9–12, 36, 51, 96, 129–31, 184
 rhythmic sense, 16, 65, 78, 106, 191, 243, 277, 286
 safecracking, 15, 189–90
 scientific work computing, 6, 138, 175–82, 190–91, 198, 201, 329,

407–8, 414–15, 435

 cosmic rays, 81–82, 215
 electrodynamics (Wheeler-Feynman), 110–15, 117–29, 147, 215,

246, 253–54, 381
 forces in molecules, 9, 86–90

 genetics, 14, 349–51
 gravitation, 9, 120, 316, 351–54, 434
 partons, 9, 390–96
 path integrals, 132, 174, 229–31, 246–51, 254–55, 275, 349, 354
 predetonation, 6, 168–69
 quantum electrodynamics, 6–9, 127–29, 146–48, 245–52, 258, 267–

 quantum mechanics, 74–76
 superfluidity, 9, 298–303
 tiny machines, 14, 354–56, 407
 weak interactions, 9, 335–39
 and the sixties, 405–7
 socialization of, 26–27, 32, 45–46, 62–64, 97–98
 sports and, 32, 63, 401
 storytelling, 11, 25, 28–29, 46–47, 222–25
 theses, 9, 86–90, 138–41, 146–48, 215, 229, 246, 249
 war work, 137–38. See also isotron project; atomic bomb
 women and, 3, 5, 32, 45–46, 63–64, 97, 192, 200, 212, 277, 286–93,

342–46, 411–12

Feynman diagrams, 7–8, 11, 270–76, 282, 303, 330, 335, 348, 352, 394,

 acceptance of, 275–78
 precursors, 104, 130–31
 Schwinger and, 276–77
Feynman-Hellmann theorem, 89—90
Feynman Lectures on Physics, 12, 21–22, 37–38, 145, 357–64, 407,

435–36

Field, Richard, 402–3
field, 18–19,48–49, 121, 139, 260
 derived from quantum mechanics, 368
 Feynman’s aversion to, 100–101, 109–10, 146–47, 250, 380
 gravitational, 74, 351–52
 neutrino, 337
 particles and, 102, 132, 275
 parton, 391–95
 paths of, 275

 visualization of, 102, 242, 245–46
field theory, 48–49, 118, 146, 250, 256, 261–62, 275, 279–80, 326, 348,

381, 402
 decline of, 330
fission, nuclear, 79, 95, 136, 146, 161–63, 168, 172–73
Fitzgerald, F. Scott, 97
flavor (particle property), 229, 390, 403
Fleming, Alexander, 133, 329
Flexagons, 9, 103–4, 131
“The Flight of the Bumblebee,” 15
Fonda, Henry, 44
Ford, Henry, 40
Fort Knox, 164
Fowler, Willy, 316
Frankel, Stanley, 180
Frankford Arsenal (Philadelphia), 137–38
free will, 431
French, Bruce, 253–54
 Freud, Sigmund, 318, 326
friction, 9, 29, 299–302, 356, 361, 398
Frisch, Otto, 154, 203
 Fuchs, Klaus, 6, 185, 187, 190, 191, 201, 296–97
functional roots, 137

Gardner, Martin, 104
gauge invariance, 256
Gauss, Carl Friedrich, 311
Gell-Mann, Margaret, 346
Gell-Mann, Murray, 232, 348, 351, 382
 background, 307–9
 at Caltech, 311, 338, 340–41, 346–47, 402, 405, 407
 Feynman and, 11, 310–11, 315, 332–39, 346–47, 354, 367, 387–89,

411, 434

 Nobel Prize, 376–77, 396
 parity, 332–35
 quarks, 390–96

 on Schwinger, 277, 308
 on solid-state physics, 14
 strangeness, 309–10, 360
 SU(3), 387, 389–91
 weak interactions, 335–39
Gelman, Benedict, 308
General Electric, 141, 223
general relativity, see relativity
genetics, 14, 133, 293, 349–51, 355, 358
Geneva, 339–40
genius, 8, 36, 311–29
 American, 318–19
 disappearance of, 312, 327–29
 Edison as, 319–20
 imagination in, 313, 324–25
 literature of, 312–15
 madness and, 314–19
 as “magician,” 10–11, 312, 315–17, 324
 mythologizing of, 10–11, 43–44, 315, 322
 originality, 10, 324–26
 physical basis of, 311–12
 physicists’ view of, 8, 322–24
 rationalization of, 315–16
Gerard, Alexander, 314
Germany, 22, 42, 77–78, 97, 128, 140, 167, 260, 414
Gershwin, George, 186
Gilbert, William, 68
Glashow, Sheldon, 405
God, 317, 318, 322, 372–73, 398
 Feynman and, 31–32, 115, 220–21, 372–73
 proofs of, 58–59, 67–68
 scientists and, 58–60
Gödel, Kurt, 295, 429
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 66, 236
Goldberger, Marvin, 293, 404
Goodstein, David, 12 n, 363, 386–87

Gordon, Walter, 73
Gould, Stephen Jay, 327
Graduate Record Examination, 83–84
Graham, William R., 417–21
gravitation, 9, 42, 56, 74–75, 111, 115, 120, 309, 316, 351–54, 365
Groves, Leslie R., 143–44, 159–60
Grünewald, Matthias, 65–66
gyroscope, 362

hadron, 392–95
Hamiltonian method, 128, 226
Handler, Philip, 384
Hardy, Godfrey Harold, 236
Harvard University, 83, 85, 97, 141–42, 160, 182, 216, 276–77, 308, 378,

Harvey, Thomas S., 311–12
Harvey, William, 68
Hawking, Stephen, 322, 430–32
Heisenberg, Werner. See also uncertainty in quantum mechanics
 atomic bomb and, 140
 cosmic rays and, 82
 Feynman and, 404
 quantum mechanics, 72–73, 75, 88, 102, 232, 246, 269, 367, 391
 S matrix, 267, 329
 Tomonaga and, 260
 on visualization, 5, 242
 youth of, 52, 78
helium, see superfluidity
hexaflexagons, see flexagons
Hibbs, Albert, 415
Hiroshima, 156, 203–4, 210, 218, 237, 263
history of science, 11, 41, 279–80, 313–14, 320, 322, 380
Hitchcock, Alfred, 223
Hofstadter, Douglas, 404
Holton, Gerald, 245, 385–86
Homer, 313, 314, 317

Hoover, J. Edgar, 296
Hopfield, John, 434
Hubble, Edwin, 124
Hughes Aircraft Company, 406, 415
Huxley, Thomas, 66
Huygens, Christiaan, 250
hydrodynamics, 163, 299
hydrogen, 72–74, 79, 94, 161–62, 164, 173, 198, 234
hydrogen bomb, 6, 204, 258, 278, 296, 365
Idlewild Field (Kennedy International Airport), 20
inertia, 29, 174–75, 259
infinities, see quantum mechanics
Institute for Advanced Study, 94, 106, 227, 266–70,, 295, 309, 346, 377
intelligence tests, 30
interference, 111–12, 247, 250
International Business Machines Corporation, 179–82, 198, 407, 414
Interscholastic Algebra League (New York), 32–34, 83
isotopic spin, 282, 306–7, 387
isotron project, 139–45, 157

Jacobs, Morrie, 47
Jarvis, Gregory, 415
Jehle, Herbert, 128–29, 136
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 281, 404, 414–15, 417–18
Johns Hopkins University, 94
Johnson Space Center, 426
Jones, James, 327
Jornada del Muerto (N.M.), 154, 202
Judaism, 22–23, 27–28, 65, 85, 220–21

Kac, Mark, 10–11, 249, 315, 322–23
Kazin, Alfred, 21
Kemble, Edwin C, 53
Kennedy Space Center, 426
Keynes, John Maynard, 317
Klein-Gordon equation, 73–74, 336

Klein, Oskar, 73
knowledge. See also uncertainty
 faith and, 37, 58, 221
 false, 373–74, 407
 fundamental, 14, 22, 357, 435–36
 guilty, 3, 203, 207–10, 263–64
 hoarded, 316–17
 rote, 66, 283–84, 398–401
 philosophy of, 357, 364–75, 429
 practical, 14–16, 36, 68, 366
 scarcity of, 47–48
 secret, 210
 stratification of, 9, 67, 372
Kuhn, Thomas S., 321–22
Kusch, Polykarp, 377
Kutyna, Donald J., 416, 419–23, 426
Kyōto University, 259–60

Lady Chatterley’s Lover (Lawrence), 192
Lady Eve, The, 44
Lagrange, Joseph Louis, 59–61, 250
Lagrangian method, 60–61, 88, 128–32, 147, 170–71, 228
Lamb, Willis, 234, 239, 377
Lamb shift, 234, 239–40, 251–53, 260
Landau, Lev, 130, 239 n, 297, 298, 300–301
Laplace, Pierre-Simon, Marquis de, 430
Laurence, William L., 40 n, 154–55 n
Lauritsen, Charles, 282
Lavatelli, Leo, 144 n
Lavoisier, Antoine-Laurent, 39
law, scientific, 29, 57–61, 101, 109, 244, 265, 294, 299, 317, 325, 338,

365–67, 411

lawn-sprinkler problem, 106–8
Lawrence, D. H., 237
Lawrence, Ernest O., 130, 136, 166, 226
 calutron, 142–44

least action, principle of, 57–61, 228, 362, 366
 Feynman’s first encounter, 60–61
 in quantum mechanics, 121, 127–29, 131–32, 138–39, 147, 247–50
Lee, Tsung Dao, 333–34, 336–37
Leighton, Ralph, 409–10
Leighton, Robert B., 363
Levi-Civita, Tullio, 56
Lewine, Frances (cousin), 26, 438
Lewine, Pearl (Phillips) (aunt), 25, 26
Lewine, Ralph (uncle), 26
Lewine, Robert (cousin), 26
Lewis, Gilbert N., 120
light, 14, 30, 57–61, 71–72, 80–83, 100–1, 110–11, 120–21, 125–26,
247, 250, 259, 273, 284, 368, 373. See also photon; quantum
electrodynamics

Lilly, John, 406
Lindemann, Ferdinand von, 52
liquid helium, see superfluidity
Littlewood, J. E., 236, 238
lock picking, 15, 187–88, 297, 340
Lombroso, Cesare, 318
Long Island Rail Road, 20
Lorentz, Hendrik A., 72
Los Alamos, 3, 6, 8, 9, 49, 185–87, 190, 204–5, 216, 218
 choice of site, 159–60
 computing at, 164, 175–82, 190–91, 198, 201
 postwar, 208–10, 212, 234
 security, 161–62, 187, 191–92, 237
 theoretical division, 165–66, 169, 172
Los Angeles Times, 437
Love in America (Cohn), 192
Lovingood, Judson A., 419

McAuliffe, Christa, 415
McCarran Immigration Act, 297
MacInnes, Duncan, 232

McLellan, William, 356
McMillin Theater (Columbia University), 252
McNair, Ronald, 415
McSherry, Rose, 263, 266
Magic City, The (Nesbit), 237
Magic Mountain, The (Mann), 134
Mailer, Norman, 326
Manhattan Project, see atomic bomb; Los Alamos
Marchant calculator, see calculating machines
Marshak, Robert, 256, 337–38, 411
Marshall Space Flight Center, 417, 426
Marx, Groucho, 9, 405
mass, 4–5, 99, 231, 239–40, 251, 262, 272, 283
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 49, 51–91
 curriculum, 66
 cyclotron, 107
 fraternities, 62–64, 69, 74, 117, 374
 machine shops, 77–78
 physics at, 53–56, 66–67, 79–80
 Radiation Laboratory, 91, 136–38, 141, 158, 166, 209, 216, 234
 senior theses, 82–83, 86
 social life, 62–64
mathematics, 25, 47, 52, 83, 155, 235
 in biology, 132
 education, 399–401
 Feynman and, 27, 32, 34–36, 102–5, 129, 182–83, 217–18
 music and, 65
 Nobel Prize and, 377
 nonlinear, 164, 174, 178–81
 partitions, 238
 physics vs., 52–54, 56, 102–3, 145, 238
 probability theory, 34, 166, 168–69, 197, 249
 recreational, 34–36, 103–5
Maupertuis, Pierre-Louis Moreau de, 59, 61
Mautner, Leonard, 23, 34
Maxwell, James Clerk, 49, 101, 110–11, 118, 262, 368, 431

Maya, 292, 367
Mayhew, Nye, 62
Mayo Clinic, 195–96, 219
Mead, Carver, 434
Mead, Margaret, 287
medicine
 Feynman and, 125–27, 194–96, 402
 scientific method in, 132–34, 194–96
 tuberculosis, 133–35, 149–50
Melchior, Lauritz, 328
Melville, Herman, 319
Menge, Edward J. v. K., 52–53
Merton, Robert K., 329
meson, 146, 229, 250, 256, 269, 270–71, 282–83, 304, 309, 333, 336
Metallurgical Laboratory (Chicago), 146, 157–58, 161, 164
 Metropolis, Nicholas, 180–81, 185
Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York), 46
Michelangelo Buonarroti, 328
Michigan State University, 292
microbiology, 133, 293, 329, 349–51, 355, 358
Mill, John Stuart, 66
Miller, Glenn, 62
Millikan, Robert, 33, 81, 306, 358
Milton, 314
mind, see consciousness
miniaturization, see nanotechnology
Minkowski, Hermann, 70, 109, 122–23
miracles, 58, 362, 372–73
Miramar Palace Hotel (Rio de Janeiro), 282, 287
Miranda, Carmen, 278
mirror, 331. See also symmetry
Möbius strip, 67
Moore, Jesse, 419–20
Morrison, Philip, 10 n, 157, 212, 263, 285, 407
Morse, Philip M., 53, 55, 76, 78–80, 83–84, 86, 91
Morse, Samuel, 319

Morton, Donald, 404
Morton Thiokol, 419, 421, 425
Mount Wilson Observatory, 293
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 319, 322–23, 325, 328
Mulloy, Lawrence, 422–23
Munich, University of, 52, 53, 166
music, 14, 15, 65, 285–86, 319, 322–23, 328

Nabokov, Vladimir, 243
nanotechnology, 14, 77, 354–56, 407
NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration), 415–28
National Academy of Sciences, 259, 383–84
National Air and Space Museum (Smithsonian Institution), 421
National Geographic, 46
National Research Council, 93, 216, 428
National Science Foundation, 210
National Youth Administration, 76
nature
 laws of, 57–61, 101, 109, 244, 265, 294, 299, 317, 325, 338, 365–67,

 simplicity in, 13–14, 22, 59–60, 78, 260, 432–38
Nazi Party, 167
Neddermeyer, Seth, 170
Nesbit, Edith, 237
Neumann, John von, 115, 117, 202, 255
 early computing, 181–82
 fluid models, 299
 and irresponsibility, 181, 200
 mental calculating, 175
neuropsychology, 312, 321
neutrino, 283, 335–38
neutron, 78–80, 94–95, 114, 136, 140, 157, 161–63, 168, 172–75, 198,

270, 305, 307, 335, 392

New York Academy of Sciences, 232
New York City, 20–23, 27, 41, 48–49
 public schools, 30–32, 48

New York Herald Tribune, 233
New York Times, 42, 154, 235, 375–76, 421–22
New York University, 34
New Yorker, 399
Newman, Thomas H., 356
Newton, Isaac, 38, 41, 57–61, 109, 363
 forces and, 88, 111, 228
 as genius, 314–15, 317, 319–20, 328–29
 laws of, 29, 59–61, 106, 147, 365, 368, 375
 originality and, 10
 time and, 119
Niels Bohr Institute, 4, 5, 93, 279
Nishijima, Kazuhiko, 310, 360
Nobel Prize, 5, 23, 49, 166, 209, 242, 375–82, 396
 Bethe’s, 166, 377
 Bohr’s, 242, 375–76
 Chandrasekhar’s, 316
 effect on winners, 381–83
 Einstein’s, 375–77
 Feynman’s, 9, 349, 375–83, 401, 408, 417
 Fleming’s, 133
 Gell-Mann’s, 390, 396
 Lamb’s, 234
 nomination by Feynman, 396
 Oppenheimer and, 5, 159, 377
 prestige of, 374–76
 rule of three, 377
 Yang and Lee’s, 334
nonlinear mathematics, 164, 174, 178–81
nuclear physics, see physics
nucleus, 9, 79–80, 130, 264, 307, 392
 molecular forces, 89–90
 uranium, 95

Oak Ridge, 141, 165, 197–200, 205, 209, 228
Oersted, Hans Christian, 320

Office of Naval Research, 209, 211, 294
Olum, Paul, 141–42, 145, 158, 162, 178, 190
Omar Khayyám, 343
Omni, 396
Onizuka, Ellison, 415
Onsager, Lars, 300–301, 316
Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 4–6, 24, 53, 85, 158–60, 162–64, 166, 168, 175,

185, 187, 198, 233, 239, 255, 258, 260–61, 270–71, 330, 333

 Dyson and, 259, 266–70, 377
 Feynman and, 6, 85, 144, 184, 190, 199–200, 204, 226–27, 257–59,

266–70

 Nobel Prize, 5, 159, 377
 post-bomb psychology, 3, 203, 207–10
 Schwinger and, 158, 216, 234, 252, 257–59, 266–70
 security trials, 5, 210, 292, 295–96
 at Trinity, 154–56
originality, see genius
out-of-body experiences, 14, 406

Pais, Abraham, 99, 228 n, 233, 307, 309–10, 332–33
Pale Fire (Nabokov), 243
Palmer Physical Laboratory (Princeton University), 107–8
Pan American Airways, 278, 287
Paris Match, 286
parity, 330–35, 338–40
Park, David, 10 n, 61, 124, 366
particle accelerators. See also CERN; Stanford Linear Accelerator Center
 early, 95–96, 107
 postwar, 210–11, 226, 255–56, 295, 304, 309, 332, 389–91, 435–36
 Soviet, 298
 technique, 16, 305–6
 in uranium separation, 139–45
particles. See also electron; photon; etc.
 associated production, 307, 309
 conceptions of, 5, 89, 123, 242–43, 256, 261–62, 275, 283, 307, 369,

 fundamental, 58, 283
 inertia and, 175
 interaction of, 48, 102, 110–12, 117–18, 121, 139, 147
 paths, 7, 57–61, 109, 121, 128, 132, 171, 229–31, 247–49, 255, 258
 proliferation of, 114, 256, 283, 304–5, 309, 330, 389
 quasi-, 300–302
 scattering, 79–82, 174, 256
 virtual, 273–75
 waves and, 7, 18–19, 73, 80, 99, 243, 247
partons, 9, 387–96
Pasadena (Calif.), 82, 277, 281–82
 Huntington Hotel, 347
path integrals, 246–51, 254–55, 275
 in beta decay, 336
 development of, 132, 174, 229–31
 first presentation, 258
 in gravitation, 354
 in masers, 349
 revival of, 354, 404
Pauli, Wolfgang, 117–18, 127, 216, 242, 257, 269. See also exclusion

principle
 on Dirac, 58
 “ganz falsch,” 115, 404
 on parity, 334
Pauling, Linus, 40, 293
Peierls, Rudolf, 169
penicillin, 133, 196, 329
periodic table, 294, 389
Phi Beta Delta (MIT), 63–64, 69, 74, 117, 374
Phillips, Henry (maternal grandfather), 24, 26
Phillips, Johanna (née Helinksy, maternal grandmother), 24
philosophy, 58–60, 364–75, 391
 atoms and, 36–38, 67–70
 Feynman and, 13–14, 182, 232, 364–75, 397–98, 400, 429, 436
 quantum mechanics and, 54, 88–89, 429–30
 time and, 109, 123–26, 243–44

photon, 54, 120–21, 242–43, 246, 268, 270, 273–75, 394
Physical Review, 6, 48, 216, 261, 266, 275, 310, 316, 381
 of the blind men, 435
 Feynman and, 76, 82, 90, 249, 271–72, 338
 Feynman diagrams in, 283–84
 women in, 289
Physikalische Zeitschrift der Sowjetunion, 48, 128
physics, 48. See also quantum electrodynamics, quantum mechanics
 American, 44–45, 53–55
 anti-Semitism in, 53, 84–85
 as career, 52–53, 91
 conferences
 Cambridge, Mass. (1941), 117
 Chicago (1933), 40
 Cornell (1963), 123–26
 New York (1948), 252
 New York (1949), 270
 New York (1955), 301
 Oldstone-on-the-Hudson (1950), 271
 Pasadena (1959), 354–55
 Pocono (1948), 4–8, 255–61, 288, 304, 384
 Princeton (1946), 226
 “Rochester” (1950–57), 304, 310, 332–33, 334–35, 339
 San Francisco (1972), 411–12
 Shelter Island (1948), 232–34
 Solvay (1961), 347
 Warsaw (1962), 353–54
 elementary particle, 9, 16, 294–95
 elite, 4–5
 experiment in, 16, 234, 305–6
 final laws, 432–34
 generations of, 8
 grand unified theories, 431–34
 heroes in, 8
 history, 279–80, 380
 as human activity, 364

 in Japan, 259–61
 journals, 48
 language of, 14, 229, 295, 390, 431
 military and, 4, 209–11, 294–95, 385
 models in, 86, 210, 243–44, 299, 367–68, 375, 437
 nuclear, 40, 48, 67, 79–80, 94–96, 98, 130, 136–45, 163–75, 196–

200, 209–11, 226

 prewar growth, 98
 solid-state, 14, 86–88, 298
 teaching, 55–56, 357–59
 unification, 7, 265–66
 visualization in, 5, 7, 241–49, 255–56, 302–3, 325–26
 women in, 289, 411–12
 World War II and, 4
Physics Today, 259, 289, 384–85
Piaggio, H. T. H., 236
Picasso, Pablo, 326
pion, 304–5, 332–33, 336
Planck, Max, 71, 146
Plato, 36
Plutonium, 141, 164–65, 168, 170, 173, 196–9’
Pocono conference (1948), 4–8, 255–61, 288, 304, 384
Podolsky, Boris, 216
poetry, 7–8, 31–32, 69, 105, 244, 314, 373–74, 412–13, 436–37
poker, 182, 239
polaron, 349
polio, 133
Polkinghorne, John, 215 n, 334 n, 372
positron, see antimatter
Presbyterian Sanatorium (Albuquerque, N.M.), 3, 159, 170, 184, 192
Princeton University, 53, 58, 76, 96
 bicentennial, 226
 fellowships, 136
 Feynman and, 83–85
 Graduate College, 97, 102
 laboratories, 106–8

 oral examinations, 130
 physics colloquium, 114–15, 117
 tea, 97–98, 102–3, 130
 war work, 141
probability, 79, 119, 373, 404
 amplitude, 132, 246–49, 275, 393–94, 433
 negative, 73
 in quantum mechanics, 72–75, 128, 132, 246–49, 258, 275
 risk and, 197, 427–28
 theory of, 166, 168–69, 249
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 48
Prometheus, 203, 207–8
psychology, 19, 223–25, 255, 312–13, 321, 324, 362, 374–75, 405–6
Putnam competition, 83
Pythagoras, 41

QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter, 13
quantum chromodynamics, 402–4, 431
quantum electrodynamics, 6–9, 159, 242, 304, 330, 347–49, 377–80
 accuracy of, 330, 348
 crisis in, 99–100, 226, 234, 239
 Dyson’s, 266–72, 377–78
 early, 48–49
 Feynman’s, 127–29, 146–48, 245–52, 258, 267–77, 311, 321, 380–81
 “partons” of, 394
 Schwinger’s, 251–52, 255–62, 266–69, 275–76, 321
 Tomonaga’s, 259–61
Quantum Electrodynamics, 12
quantum mechanics, 13, 55–56, 70–77, 88–89
 causality and, 7, 40, 70–72, 112, 243, 371
 chemistry and, 40, 87
 diffusion and, 174–75, 249
 exclusion principle, 6–7, 255, 258
 infinities in, 4, 49, 99–100, 231–32, 238
 Klein-Gordon equation, 74
 least action in, 121, 127–29, 131–32, 138–39, 147, 247–50

 mysteriousness of, 40, 44–45, 54, 70–71, 114,436–37
 philosophy and, 40, 70–72, 243–44, 371–72, 375
 probability in, 72–75, 88, 128, 132, 246–49, 275, 393–94, 433
 two-slit experiment, 247–48, 250, 366
 uncertainty and, 8, 70, 72–73, 75, 78, 89, 258, 321, 361, 429–30, 435
 wave-particle duality, 7, 18–19, 40, 54, 80, 250, 261–62
quarks, 9, 390–96, 402–3, 432
quasiparticles, 300–302
Quine, W. V., 371
Quintilian, 313

Rabi, Isidor Isaac, 232, 233, 386
 anti-Semitism and, 53
 at Columbia, 232, 234, 251
 Feynman and, 144, 296
 at Pocono, 255
 at Radiation Laboratory, 91, 137, 141
 Schwinger and, 215–16, 243
 at Trinity, 154, 156
radar, 91, 124, 136–38, 209, 216
radiation resistance, 109–11, 114
radiation science, 196–200
radio, 17–19, 46–47
 ham, 282
rainbow, 130, 434
Ramanujan, Srinivasa, 238
Rand, Sally, 41
Reagan, Ronald W., 416
reality, 38, 44–45, 101, 243–44, 375, 395
Reichstag, 167
relativity, 71, 99–100
 general, 42, 74–75, 115, 316, 329, 351—54
 popularization of, 42–43, 45, 429–30
 quantum electrodynamics and, 99–100
 renormalization, 239–40, 251–52, 259–62, 270, 282, 330, 377
qualms over, 347–49, 378, 380

Resnick, Judith, 415
Reviews of Modern Physics, 80, 249
Rhodes, Richard, 159
Richter, Charles, 281–82
Ride, Sally, 417
Riordan, Michael, 389–90
risk, 197, 427–28
Ritz, Walter, 118–19
Robertson, H. P., 130
Roethke, Theodore, 412–13
Rogers, Will, 281
Rogers, William P., 416–17, 419–23, 426
Rome, University of, 166
Röntgen, Wilhelm, 99
Rosen, Nathan, 216
Rothstein, E. V., 412
Royal Air Force, 236–37
Rubáiyát (Omar Khayyám), 343
Russell, Henry Norris, 115
Ruth, Babe, 43–44, 327
Rutherford, Ernest, 71

S matrix, 267, 329
safecracking, 15, 189–90
Sakharov, Andrei, 297
Salam, Abdus, 405, 431
Salieri, Antonio, 322
Salk, Jonas, 133
samba, 286, 340
 Sands, Matthew, 343, 363
Schein, Marcel, 304
Schrieffer, Robert, 303
Schrödinger, Erwin, 73–75, 88, 128, 232, 242, 246, 367
 cat, 243
Schrödinger equation, 73, 88–89, 102, 129, 146–47, 174, 249, 301, 436
Schweber, Silvan S., 348, 386–87

Schwinger, Julian, 158, 215–16, 227, 243, 295, 309, 395
 childhood, 48–49
 early papers, 48–49
 Feynman and, 16, 49, 252, 377–79
 Nobel Prize, 377–79
 at Pocono, 5–6, 255–58
 quantum electrodynamics and, 239, 241, 251–53, 255–63, 266–69,

271, 275–77, 279–80, 321, 347, 367

 at Shelter Island, 233–34
 students, 276–77, 378
science
 as career, 52–53
 creativity in, 314, 321, 324–26, 409
 experimental attitude, 14–16, 19
 explanation in, 29
 laws of, 13–14
 military financing of, 4, 209–11, 294–95, 385
 religion and, 31–32, 58–60
Science, 145
science fiction, 121, 235, 255, 299
Scientific American, 104, 414
scientists
 aging of, 347
 as children, 17, 19
 as craftsmen, 321–22
 as nerds, 44, 63
 patriotism of, 137
 public view of, 40–42, 44, 203
Scobee, Francis, 415–16
Segrè, Emilio, 198–99
seismology, 281–82
Selective Service, 222–25, 297
Serber, Robert, 163, 168–69, 173
sexual politics, 287–91,411–12
Shaaray Tefila, 23
Shakespeare, William, 313, 314, 317, 325, 328

Shelter Island conference (1948), 232–34
Shockley, William, 85, 137
Siegel, Carl Ludwig, 98
simplicity, see nature, simplicity in
Sitwell, Edith, 106
Slater, John C, 40, 53–55, 67–68, 83–91, 94, 301, 366
Slotin, Louis, 196–97
Slotnick, Murray, 270–72, 282
Smith, Lloyd, 263
Smith, Michael, 415
Smyth, Harry D., 84, 137, 140, 144, 149–50, 164, 227
Snow, C. P., 9–10
solid-state physics, see physics
Sommerfeld, Arnold, 166
South Pacific, 308
Soviet Academy of Science, 297–98
Soviet Union, 6, 191, 278, 296–98, 340–41
space, generalized conceptions of, 76, 507
 space shuttle, see Challenger
space travel, 218–19, 340–41, 374, 414–28
space-time, 7, 74, 109, 124, 152, 246–49, 255, 272–75, 355, 351, 354
 world-lines in, 121–22
spectroscopy, 55, 85, 254
Spellbound (Hitchcock), 225
spin, 75, 80, 99, 228–51, 240, 242, 282, 350, 356–57, 375, 399
Sputnik, 340–41,414
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC), 391–95
Stanwyck, Barbara, 44
State Department, United States, 285, 298, 341
Stone, Arthur, 104
strangeness, 509–10, 360
Stratton, Julius A., 55, 55–56
Strauss, Lewis L., 295–96
streptomycin, 195–96
string theory, 455
stroboscope, 77

strong interaction, 507, 509–10, 350, 354, 392–95
Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Kuhn), 521–22
Stückelberg, Ernst, 272–75
SU(3), 387, 389–91, 455–54
Sudarshan, E. C. C, 357–58, 411
superconductivity, 299–505
superfluidity, 9, 298–505
Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman!, 11, 409–11
surface tension, 501
Sykes, Christopher, 369
symmetry, 258, 255, 506, 509–10, 361
 breaking, 389–90, 452, 455
 isospin, 506
 left-right, 506, 350–55, 358–40
 spin, 229
 time, 111–14, 118–20
Szilard, Leo, 156, 160

technology
 attitudes toward, 41, 257, 406, 416
 influence on theory, 41, 71, 108, 124
telescope, 27, 77, 120, 281, 284–85
television, 45, 47, 520, 346, 372, 416
Teller, Edward, 255, 255
 cold war and, 341
 Feynman and, 6–7, 157, 224–25
 Hungarian conspiracy, 136
 hydrogen bomb, 204, 258, 296
 at Los Alamos, 166–69, 175, 197–98
 Oppenheimer and, 166–69, 296
 Schwinger and, 216
 at Trinity, 153
Tetrode, H., 120
Theory of Fundamental Processes, 12
thermodynamics, 88, 126, 174, 355, 361, 365
Thinking Machines Corporation, 454

Thomson, J. J., 42–45
Thome, Kip S., 404
thought experiment, 107–8, 245, 247–49, 355
3M Company, 406
Three Mile Island nuclear accident, 416
time
 philosophy of, 109, 125–28
 reversibility, 7, 82, 108–12, 118–20, 125, 255–54, 258, 272–74
Time, 379
Time-Life Films, 407
Tiomno, Jayme, 278
Tokyo University, 260
Tolman, Richard, 144
Tomonaga, Shin’ichiro, 259–61, 267, 377–579
Townsend Harris High School (New York), 48
Treasure Island (Stevenson), 65
triboluminescence, 285
Trinity test, 6, 65–66, 155–57, 205
Truman, Harry S, 209
tuberculosis, 155–55, 149–50, 194–96
Tübingen, University of, 167
Tuck, Helen, 385
Tuckerman, Bryant, 104
Tukey, John, 104–5
turbulence, 9, 298, 502, 450–51, 454, 436

UCLA Medical Center, 405, 457–58
UFO’s, 375–74
Ulam, Stanislaw, 155, 168, 437
uncertainty
 in computation, 175–74
 of knowledge, 5, 15, 29, 67, 126, 195, 285, 371–75, 438
 in quantum mechanics, 8, 70, 72–73, 75, 78, 89, 258, 321, 361, 429–

30, 435

Union Carbide, 141
unitarity, 7, 258

United Nations, 339
uranium
 atom, 94–95
 bomb design, 170–72
 critical mass calculations, 168–69
 diffusion in, 169–73
 hydride, 173
 isotope separation, 136, 139–46
 practical uses, 218–19
 predetonation of, 6, 168–69
 radiation danger, 195–200
 reactors, 157–58, 161–65
Urey, Harold, 144

V-A theory, see weak interaction
Vallarta, Manuel S., 81–82, 215
Verne, Jules, 235
Vinogradov, I. M., 236
visualization, see physics, visualization in
V-particles, 309–10

Watson, James, 349, 386–87
wave-particle duality, 7, 18–19, 40, 54, 80, 250, 261–62
weak interaction, 9, 309–10, 330, 334–39
Wegener, Alfred, 321
Weinberg, Steven, 101, 348, 404, 431, 435
Weiner, Charles, 409
Weisskopf, Victor, 66–67, 167–69, 175, 185, 203, 232, 241, 251–53,

309, 330, 334, 352, 382–83, 403

Welton, Theodore (T. A.), 51–52, 56, 73–79, 169–71, 173, 183, 228, 325–

Wentzel, Gregor, 272
Weyl, Hermann, 18, 52
What Do You Care What Other People Think?, 11
Wheeler, John Archibald, 93–96, 102, 124–25, 141, 146, 233, 255, 258–

 Feynman and, 96, 98–99, 106, 108, 116, 130, 147, 148, 250, 362, 380
 fission and, 94–95, 139
Wheeler-Feynman electrodynamics, 110–15, 117–29, 147, 215, 246,

253–54, 278, 333, 381
Whitehead, Alfred North, 366
Whitman, Walt, 319
Whitney, Eli, 319
Wiener, Norbert, 172
Wigner, Eugene, 53, 94, 96, 114–15, 116, 117, 130–31, 136, 137, 144,

146, 148, 184
 Wilbur, Richard, 37
Williams, Ted, 327
Wills, A. P., 56
Wilson, Robert R.
 at Cornell, 226–27
 Feynman and, 130, 139–40
 isotron, 141–44, 157–58, 160
 in Manhattan Project, 136–37, 156, 208
 on modern physics, 209–10
 Wheeler and, 93–94
Wisconsin State Journal, 43–44
Wolfe, Thomas, 84
Wolfe, Tom, 407
World’s Fair, 40–41, 260
World War I, 77
World War II, 3–4, 84, 128, 237–38
 aftermath, 208
 scientists’ preparations for, 136–38
Wu, Chien Shiung, 334–35, 337
W. W. Norton and Company, 411

X rays, 18, 55, 99, 133

Yale lock, 15, 188, 297
Yale University, 46, 97, 225, 300–301, 308
Yang, Chen Ning, 333–34, 336–37

Yang-Mills theory, 329, 353, 387
Yeager, Chuck, 417
Yukawa, Hideki, 259–60, 282

Zeitschrift für Physik, 120
Zeleny, John, 44–45
Ziman, John, 371
Zweig, George, 390–91, 394, 396

ILLUSTRATION CREDITS

TEXT ILLUSTRATIONS
Illustration 1—courtesy of the American Institute of Physics; Illustration 2—
Robin Brickman; Illustration 3—Gardner 1989; Illustration 4—Robin
Brickman; Illustration 5—Wheeler and Feynman 1945; Illustration 6—
courtesy of the Archives, California Institute of Technology; Illustration 7—
Victor Weisskopf and E. Wigner, “Berechnung der natürlichen Linienbreite
auf Grund der Diracschen Lichttheorie,” Zeitschrift für Physik 63 (1930);
Illustration 8—Robin Brickman; Illustration 9—Robin Brickman; Illustration
10—Dyson 1949a; Illustration 11—Stückelberg 1941; Illustration 12—
Feynman 1949b; 
Illustration 14—
Illustration 13—Feynman 1949b; 
Cvitanović 1983; Illustration 15—Feynman 1985a.

Image 2, 

PHOTOGRAPHS
Image 1—courtesy Joan Feynman; 
top—courtesy Joan
Feynman; Image 3, bottom—courtesy Michelle Feynman; Image 4—
courtesy Michelle Feynman; Image 5—Los Alamos Scientific Library,
courtesy AIP Niels Bohr Library; Image 6—Los Alamos Scientific Library,
courtesy AIP Niels Bohr Library; Image 7, top—S. A. Goudsmit, courtesy
AIP Niels Bohr Library; Image 8, bottom—AIP Niels Bohr Library; Image 9,
top—AIP Niels Bohr Library, Marshak Collection; Image 10, bottom—AIP
Niels Bohr Library, Physics Today Collection; Image 11, top—Richard
Hartt Photography, courtesy of Caltech; Image 12, bottom—AIP Niels Bohr
Library

Image 13, top—AIP Niels Bohr Library, Physics Today Collection; Image
14, bottom—Joe Munroe, courtesy of Caltech; Image 15—courtesy of the
Archives, California Institute of Technology; Image 16, top—UPI/Bettmann;
Image 17, bottom—courtesy Gweneth Feynman; Image 18-19, top and
bottom—courtesy Michelle Feynman; Image 20, top—courtesy Michelle
Feynman; Image 21, bottom—Consulate General of Japan, N.Y., courtesy
AIP Niels Bohr Library; Image 22, top—courtesy Michelle Feynman; Image

23, bottom—Robert Walker, courtesy Michelle Feynman; Image 24-25, top
and bottom—courtesy of Caltech; Image 26—UPI/Bettmann.

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this
ebook onscreen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced
into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any
means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of the publisher.

Grateful acknowledgment is made to the following for permission to reprint
previously published material:

British Broadcasting Corporation: Excerpt from” Fun to Imagine,” an
interview between Richard Feynman and Christopher Sykes as broadcast
by the British Broadcasting Corporation in 1983. Used by permission.

David Higham Associates: Four lines from “Tattered Serenade,” from
Collected Poems by Edith Sitwell, published by Macmillan London.
Reprinted by permission of David Higham Associates.

copyright © 1992 by James Gleick

cover design by Milan Bozic

cover image courtesy of the Archives, California Institute of Technology

ISBN: 978-1-4532-1046-8

This edition published in 2011 by Open Road Integrated Media
180 Varick Street
New York, NY 10014
www.openroadmedia.com