The Pleasure of Finding 
Things O u t 

Tbis is the edited transcript of an intewiew with Feynman made for 
the BBC television program Horizon in 1981, shown in the United 
States as an episode of Nova. Feynman had most of his I$ behind 
him by this time (3e died in 1988), so he could reflect on his experi- 
ences and accomplishments with the perspective not o3en attainable 
by a younger person. The result is a candid, relaxed, and very per- 
sonal discussion on many topics close to Feynman? heart: why know- 
ing merely the name of something is the same as not knowing any- 
thing at all about it; how he and hisjdlow atomic scientists of the 
Manhattan Project could drink and revel in the success of the terrible 
weapon they had created while on the other side of the world in Hi- 
roshima thousands of their311ow human beings were dead or dying 
from it; and why Feynman couldjust as well havegotten along with- 
out a Nobel Prize. 

The Pleasure of Finding Things Out 

The Beauty of a Flower 

I have a friend who’s an artist and he’s sometimes taken a 
view which I don’t agree with very well. He’ll hold up a 
flower and say, “Look how beautiful it is,” and I’ll agree, I 
think. And he says-“you see, I as an artist can see how beau- 
tiful this is, but you as a scientist, oh, take this all apart and 
it becomes a dull thing.” And I think that he’s kind of nutty. 
First of all, the beauty that he sees is available to other peo- 
ple and to me, too, I believe, although I might not be quite 
as refined aesthetically as he is; but I can appreciate the 
beauty of a flower. At the same time I see much more about 
the flower than he sees. I can imagine the cells in there, the 
complicated actions inside which also have a beauty. I mean 
it’s not just beauty at this dimension of one centimeter, there 
is also beauty at a smaller dimension, the inner structure. 
Also the processes, the fact that the colors in the flower 
evolved in order to attract insects to pollinate it is interest- 
ing-it means that insects can see the color. It adds a ques- 
tion: Does this aesthetic sense also exist in the lower forms? 
Why is it aesthetic? All kinds of interesting questions which 
shows that a science knowledge only adds to the excitement 
and mystery and the awe of a flower. It only adds; I don’t un- 
derstind how it subtracts. 

Avoiding Humanities 

I’ve always been very one-sided about science and when I was 
younger I concentrated almost all my effort on it. I didn’t 
have time to learn and I didn’t have much patience with 
what’s called the humanities, even though in the university 
there were humanities that you had to take. I tried my best to 
avoid somehow learning anything and working at it. It was 

The Pleasure of Finding Things Out 

only afierwards, when I got older, that I got more relaxed, 
that I’ve spread out a little bit. I’ve learned to draw and I read 
a little bit, but I’m really still a very one-sided person and I 
don’t know a great deal. I have a limited intelligence and I use 
it in a particular direction. 

Tyrannosaurus in the Window 

We had the Encyclopaedia Britannica at home and even when 
I was a small boy [my father] used to sit me on his lap and 
read to me from the Encyclopaedia Britannica, and we would 
read, say, about dinosaurs and maybe it would be talking 
about the brontosaurus or something, or the tyrannosaurus 
rex, and it would say something like, “This thing is twenty- 
five feet high and the head is six feet across,” you see, and so 
he’d stop all this and say, “Let’s see what that means. That 
would mean that if he stood in our front yard he would be 
high enough to put his head through the window but not 
quite because the head is a little bit too wide and it would 
break the window as it came by.” 

Everything we’d read would be translated as best we could 
into some reality and so I learned to do that-everything that 
I read I try to figure out what it really means, what it’s really 
saying by translating and so (LAUGHS) I used to read the En- 
cyclopaedia when I was a boy but with translation, you see, so 
it was very exciting and interesting to think there were ani- 
mals of such magnitude-I wasn’t frightened that there would 
be one coming in my window as a consequence of this, I 
don’t think, but I thought that it was very, very interesting, 
that they all died out and at that time nobody knew why. 

We used to go to the Catskill Mountains. We lived in New 
York and the Catskill Mountains was the place where people 
went in the summer; and the fathers-there was a big group of 

The Pleasure of Finding Things Out 

i 9 e Pleasure of Finding i9ings Out 

people there but the fathers would all go back to New York to 
work during the week and only come back on the weekends. 
When my father came he would take me for walks in the 
woods and tell me various interesting things that were going 
on in the woods-which I’ll explain in a minute-but the other 
mothers seeing this, of course, thought this was wonderful 
and that the other fathers should take their sons for walks, 
and they tried to work on them but they didn’t get anywhere 
at first and they wanted my father to take all the kids, but he 
didn’t want to because he had a special relationship with me- 
we had a personal thing together-so it ended up that the 
other fathers had to take their children for walks the next 
weekend, and the next Monday when they were all back to 
work, all the kids were playing in the field and one kid said 
to me, “See that bird, what kind of a bird is that?” And I said, 
“I haven’t the slightest idea what kind of a bird it is.” He says, 
“It’s a brown throated thrush,” or something, “Your father 
doesn’t tell you anything.” But it was the opposite: my father 
had taught me. Looking at a bird he says, “Do you know what 
that bird is? It’s a brown throated thrush; but in Portuguese 
it’s a . . . in Italian a . . . ,” he says “in Chinese it’s a . . . , in 
Japanese a . . . ,” etcetera. “Now,” he says, “you know in all 
the languages you want to know what the name of that bird 
is and when you’ve finished with all that,” he says, “you’ll 
know absolutely nothing whatever about the bird. You only 
know about humans in different places and what they call the 
bird. Now,” he says, “let’s look at the bird.” 

He had taught me to notice things and one day when I was 
playing with what we call an express wagon, which is a little 
wagon which has a railing around it for children to play with 
that they can pull around. It had a ball in it-I remember 
this-it had a ball in it, and I pulled the wagon and I noticed 
something about the way the ball moved, so I went to my fa- 

ther and I said, “Say, Pop, I noticed something: When I pull 
the wagon the ball rolls to the back of the wagon, and when 
I’m pulling it along and I suddenly stop, the ball rolls to the 
front of the wagon,” and I says, “why is that?” And he said, 
“That nobody knows,” he said. “The general principle is that 
things that are moving try to keep on moving and things that 
are standing still tend to stand still unless you push on them 
hard.” And he says, “This tendency is called inertia but no- 
body knows why it’s true.” Now that’s a deep understanding- 
he doesn’t give me a name, he knew the difference between 
knowing the name o f something and knowing something, 
which I learnt very early. He went o n to say, “If you look 
close you’ll find the ball does not rush to the back of the 
wagon, but it’s the back of the wagon that you’re pulling 
against the ball; that the ball stands still or as a matter of fact 
from the friction starts to move forward really and doesn’t 
move back.” So I ran back to the little wagon and set the ball 
up again and pulled the wagon from under it and looking 
sideways and seeing indeed he was right-the ball never 
moved backwards in the wagon when I pulled the wagon for- 
ward. It moved backward relative to the wagon, but relative 
to the sidewalk it was moved forward a little bit, it’s just [that] 
the wagon caught up with it. So that’s the way I was educated 
by my father, with those kinds of examples and discussions, 
no pressure, just lovely interesting discussions. 

Algebra for the Practical Man 

My cousin, at that time, who was three years older, was in 
high school and was having considerable difficulty with his 
algebra and had a tutor come, and I was allowed to sit in a 
corner while (LAUGHS) the tutor would try to teach my 
cousin algebra, problems like 2x plus something. I said to my 

The Pleasure of Finding Things Out 

?%e Pleasure of Finding ?%ings Out 

cousin then, “What’re you trying to do?” You know, I hear 
him talking about x. He says, ”What do you know-2x + 7 is 
equal to 15,” he says “and you’re trying to find out what x 
is.” I says, “You mean 4.” He says, “Yeah, but you did it with 
arithmetic, you have to do it by algebra,” and that’s why my 
cousin was never able to do algebra, because he didn’t un- 
derstand how he was supposed to do it. There was no way. I 
learnt algebra fortunately by not going to school and know- 
ing the whole idea was to find out what x was and it didn’t 
make any difference how you did it-there’s no such thing as, 
you know, you do it by arithmetic, you do it by algebra-that 
was a false thing that they had invented in school so that the 
children who have to study algebra can all pass it. They had 
invented a set of rules which if you followed them without 
thinking could produce the answer: subtract 7 from both 
sides, if you have a multiplier divide both sides by the mul- 
tiplier and so on, and a series of steps by which you could 
get the answer if you didn’t understand what you were trying 
to do. 

There was a series of math books, which started Arithmetic 
for the Practical Man, and then Algebrafor the PracticalMan, and 
then Trigonometly for the Practical Man, and I learned trigon- 
ometry for the practical man from that. I soon forgot it again 
because I didn’t understand it very well but the series was 
coming out, and the library was going to get Calculus for the 
Practical Man and I knew by this time by reading the Ency- 
clopaedia that calculus was an important subject and it was an 
interesting one and I ought to learn it. I was older now, I was 
perhaps thirteen; and then the calculus book finally came out 
and I was so excited and I went to the library to take it out 
and she looks at me and she says, “Oh, you’re just a child, 
what are you taking this book out for, this book is a [book for 
adults].” So this was one of the few times in my life I was un- 

comfortable and I lied and I said it was for my father, he se- 
lected it. So I took it home and I learnt calculus from it and 
I tried to explain it to my father and he’d start to read the be- 
ginning of it and he found it confusing and it really bothered 
,tne a little bit. I didn’t know that he was so limited, you 
know, that he didn’t understand, and I thought it was rela- 
tively simple and straightforward and he didn’t understand it. 
So that was the first time I knew I had learnt more in some 
sense than he. 

Epaulettes and the Pope 

One of the things that my father taught me besides physics 
(LAUGHS), whether it’s correct or not, was a disrespect for re- 
spectable . . . for certain kinds of things. For example, when I 
was a little boy, and a rotogravure-that’s printed pictures in 
newspapers-first came out in the New York Times, he used to 
sit me again on his knee and he’d open a picture, and there 
was a picture of the Pope and everybody bowing in front of 
him. And he’d say, “Now look at these humans. Here is one 
human standing here, and all these others are bowing. Now 
what is the difference? This one is the Pope”-he hated the 
Pope anyway-and he’d say, “the difference is epau1ettes”-of 
course not in the case of the Pope, but if he was a general-it 
was always the uniform, the position, ”but this man has the 
same human problems, he eats dinner like anybody else, he 
goes to the bathroom, he has the same kind of problems as 
everybody, he’s a human being. Why are they all bowing to 
him? Only because of his name and his position, because of 
his uniform, not because of something special he did, or his 
honor, or something like that.’’ He, by the way, was in the 
uniform business, so he knew what the difference was be- 

The Pleasure of Finding Things Out 

. 

tween the man with the uniform off and the uniform on; it’s 
the same man for him. 

He was happy with me, I believe. Once, though, when I 
came back from MIT-I’d been there a few years-he said to 
me, ‘‘Now,” he said, “you’ve become educated about these 
things and there’s one question I’ve always had that I’ve 
never understood very well and I’d like to ask you, now that 
you’ve studied this, to explain it to me,” and I asked him 
what it was. And he said that he understood that when an 
atom made a transition from one state to another it emits a 
particle of light called a photon. I said, “That’s right.” And 
he says, “Well, now, is the photon in the atom ahead of time 
that it comes out, or is there no photon in it to start with?” 
I says, “There’s no photon in, it’s just that when the electron 
makes a transition it comes” and he says “Well, where does 
it come from then, how does it come out?” So I couldn’t just 
say, “The view is that photon numbers aren’t conserved, 
they’re just created by the motion of the electron.” I could- 
n’t try to explain to him something like: the sound that I’m 
making now wasn’t in me. It’s not like my little boy who 
when he started to talk, suddenly said that he could n o 
longer say a certain word-the word was “cat”-because his 
word bag has run out of the word cat (LAUGHS). So there’s 
n o word bag that you have inside so that you use up the 
words as they come out, you just make them as they go 
along, and in the same sense there was no photon bag in an 
atom and when the photons come out they didn’t come 
from somewhere, but I couldn’t do much better. He was not 
satisfied with me in the respect that I never was able to ex- 
plain any of the things that he didn’t understand (LAUGHS). 
So he was unsuccessful, he sent me through all these univer- 
sities in order to find out these things and he never did find 
out (LAUGHS). 

The Pleasure of Finding Things Out 

Invitation to the Bomb 

[while working on his PhD thesis, Feynman was asked to join the 
project to develop the atomic bomb.] It was a completely differ- 
ent kind of a thing. It would mean that I would have to stop 
the research in what I was doing, which is my life’s desire, to 
take time off to do this, which I felt I should do in order to 
protect civilization. Okay? So that was what I had to debate 
with myself. My first reaction was, well, I didn’t want to get 
interrupted in my normal work to do this odd job. There was 
also the problem, of course, of any moral thing involving 
war. I wouldn’t have much to do with that, but it kinda 
scared me when I realized what the weapon would be, and 
that since it might be possible, it must be possible. There was 
nothing that I knew that indicated that if we could do it they 
couldn’t do it, and therefore it was very important to try to 
cooperate. 

[In early 1943 Feynman joined Oppenheimer’s team at Los 
Alamos.] With regard to moral questions, I do have some- 
thing I would like to say about it. The original reason to start 
the project, which was that the Germans were a danger, 
started me off on a process of action which was to try to de- 
velop this first system at Princeton and then at Los Alamos, 
to try to make the bomb work. All kinds of attempts were 
made to redesign it to make it a worse bomb and so on. It was 
a project on which we all worked very, very hard, all co-oper- 
ating together. And with any project like that you continue to 
work trying to get success, having decided to do it. But what 
I did-immorally I would say-was to not remember the rea- 
son that I said I was doing it, so that when the reason 
changed, because Germany was defeated, not the singlest 
thought came to my mind at all about that, that that meant 

The Pleasure of Finding Things Out 

now that I have to reconsider why I am continuing to do this. 
I simply didn’t think, okay? 

Success and Suffering 

[On 6 August 1945 the atomic bomb was exploded over Hi- 
roshima.] The only reaction that I remember-perhaps I was 
blinded by my own reaction-was a very considerable elation 
and excitement, and there were parties and people got drunk 
and it would make a tremendously interesting contrast, what 
was going on in Los Alamos at the same time as what was 
going on in Hiroshima. I was involved with this happy thing 
and also drinking and drunk and playing drums sitting on the 
hood of-the bonnet of-a Jeep and playing drums with ex- 
citement running all over Los Alamos at the same time as 
people were dying and struggling in Hiroshima. 

I had a very strong reaction after the war of a peculiar na- 
ture-it may be from just the bomb itself and it may be for 
some other psychological reasons, I’d just lost my wife or 
something, but I remember being in New York with my 
mother in a restaurant, immediately after [Hiroshima], and 
thinking about New York, and I knew how big the bomb in Hi- 
roshima was, how big an area it covered and so on, and I real- 
ized from where we were-I don’t know, 59th Street-that to 
drop one on 34th Street, it would spread all the way out here 
and all these people would be killed and all the things would 
be killed and there wasn’t only one bomb available, but it was 
easy to continue to make them, and therefore that things were 
sort of doomed because already it appeared to me-very early, 
earlier than to others who were more optimistic-that intema- 
tional relations and the way people were behaving were no dif- 
ferent than they had ever been before and that it was just going 
to go on the same way as any other thing and I was sure that 

lie Pleasure of Finding 73ings Out 

it was going, therefore, to be used very soon. So I felt very un- 
comfortable and thought, really believed, that it was silly: I 
would see people building a bridge and I would say “they 
don’t understand.” I really believed that it was senseless to 
make anything because it would all be destroyed very soon 
anyway, but they didn’t understand that and I had this very 
strange view of any construction that I would see, I would al- 
ways think how foolish they are to try to make something. So 
I was really in a kind of depressive condition. 

”I Don’t Have t o Be Good Because 
They Think I‘m Going t o Be Good.” 

[Ajer the war Fgnman joined Hans Bethe” at Cornell University. 
He turned down the o$er of a job at Princeton’s Institute for Ad- 
vanced Study.] They [must have] expected me to be wonder- 
ful to offer me a job like this and I wasn’t wonderful, and 
therefore I realized a new principle, which was that I’m not 
responsible for what other people think I am able to do; I 
don’t have to be good because they think I’m going to be 
good. And somehow or other I could relax about this, and I 
thought to myself, I haven’t done anything important and 
I’m never going to do anything important. But I used to 
enjoy physics and mathematical things and because I used to 
play with them it was in very short order [that I] worked the 
things out for which I later won the Nobel Prize.? 

*(1906- ) Winner of the 1967 Nobel Prize in Physics for contributions 
to the theory of nuclear reactions, especially for his discoveries concerning 
the energy production in stars. Ed. 

tIn 1965, the Nobel Prize for Physics was shared by Richard Feynman, 
Julian Schwinger, and Sin-Itiro Tomonaga for their fundamental work in 
quantum electrodynamics, and its deep consequences for the physics of el- 
ementary particles. Ed. 

T h e Pleasure of Finding Things Out 

The Pleasure OfFinding Things Out 

The Nobel Prize-Was It Worth It? 

[Fgnman was awarded a Nobel Prizefor his work on quantum elec- 
trodynamics.] What I essentially did-and also it was done in- 
dependently by two other people, [Sinitiro] Tomanaga in 
Japan and Uulian] Schwinger-was to figure out how to con- 
trol, how to analyze and discuss the original quantum theory 
of electricity and magnetism that had been written in 1928; 
how to interpret it so as to avoid the infinities, to make cal- 
culations for which there were sensible results which have 
since turned out to be in exact agreement with every experi- 
ment which has been done so far, so that quantum electro- 
dynamics fits experiment in every detail where it’s applica- 
ble-not involving the nuclear forces, for instance-and it was 
the work that I did in 1947 to figure out how to do that, for 
which I won the Nobel Prize. 

[BBC: Was it worth the Nobel Prize?] As a (LAUGHS) . . . I 
don’t know anything about the Nobel Prize, I don’t under- 
stand what it’s all about or what’s worth what, but if the peo- 
ple in the Swedish Academy decide that x J j J or z wins the 
Nobel Prize then so be it. I won’t have anything to do with 
the Nobel Prize . . . it’s a pain in the . . . (LAUGHS). I don’t 
like honors. I appreciate it for the work that I did, and for 
people who appreciate it, and I know there’s a lot of physi- 
cists who use my work, I don’t need anything else, I don’t 
think there’s any sense to anything else. I don’t see that it 
makes any point that someone in the Swedish Academy de- 
cides that this work is noble enough to receive a prize-I’ve 
already got the prize. The prize is the pleasure of finding the 
thing out, the kick in the discovery, the observation that 
other people use it [my work]-those are the real things, the 
honors are unreal to me. I don’t believe in honors, it both- 
ers me, honors bother, honors is epaulettes, honors is uni- 

forms. My papa brought me up this way. I can’t stand it, it 
hurts me. 

When I was in high school, one of the first honors I got 
was to be a member of the Arista, which is a group of kids 
who got good grades-eh?-and everybody wanted to be a 
member of the Arista, and when I got into the Arista I dis- 
covered that what they did in their meetings was to sit 
around to discuss who else was worthy to join this wonder- 
ful group that we are-okay? So we sat around trying to de- 
cide who it was who would get to be allowed into this 
Arista. This kind of thing bothers me psychologically for 
one or another reason I don’t understand myself-honors- 
and from that day to this [it] always bothered me. When I 
became a member of the National Academy of Sciences, I 
had ultimately to resign because that was another organiza- 
tion most of whose time was spent in choosing who was il- 
lustrious enough to join, to be allowed to join us in our or- 
ganization, including such questions as [should] we 
physicists stick together because they’ve a very good chemist 
that they’re trying to get in and we haven’t got enough 
room for so-and-so. What’s the matter with chemists? The 
whole thing was rotten because its purpose was mostly to 
decide who could have this honor-okay? I don’t like hon- 
ors. 

The Rules of the Game 

[From 1950 to 1988 Fgnman was Professor o f neoretical Physics 
at the Cal$ornia Institute of Technology.] One way, that’s kind of 
a fun analogy in trying to get some idea of what we’re doing 
in trying to understand nature, is to imagine that the gods 
are playing some great game like chess, let’s say, and you 
don’t know the rules of the game, but you’re allowed to look 

The Pleasure of Finding Things Out 

The Pleasure of Finding Dings Out 

at the board, at least from time to time, in a little corner, per- 
haps, and from these observations you try to figure out what 
the rules of the game are, what the rules of the pieces mov- 
ing are. You might discover after a bit, for example, that 
when there’s only one bishop around on the board that the 
bishop maintains its color. Later on you might discover the 
law for the bishop as it moves on the diagonal which would 
explain the law that you understood before-that it main- 
tained its color- and that would be analagous to discovering 
one law and then later finding a deeper understanding of it. 
Then things can happen, everything’s going good, you’ve got 
all the laws, it looks very good, and then all of a sudden 
some strange phenomenon occurs in some corner, so you 
begin to investigate that-it’s castling, something you didn’t 
expect. We’re always, by the way, in fundamental physics, al- 
ways trying to investigate those things in which we don’t un- 
derstand the conclusions. After we’ve checked them enough, 
we’re okay. 

The thing that doesn’t fit is the thing that’s the most inter- 
esting, the part that doesn’t go according to what you ex- 
pected. Also, we could have revolutions in physics: after 
you’ve noticed that the bishops maintain their color and they 
go along the diagonal and so on for such a long time and 
everybody knows that that’s true, then you suddenly discover 
one day in some chess game that the bishop doesn’t maintain 
its color, it changes its color. Only later do you discover a new 
possibility, that a bishop is captured and that a pawn went all 
the way down to the queen’s end to produce a new bishop- 
that can happen but you didn’t know it, and so it’s very 
analagous to the way our laws are: They sometimes look pos- 
itive, they keep on working and all of a sudden some little 
gimmick shows that they’re wrong and then we have to in- 
vestigate the conditions under which this bishop change of 

color happened and so forth, and gradually learn the new rule 
that explains it more deeply. Unlike the chess game, though, 
in [which] the rules become more complicated as you go 
along, in physics, when you discover new things, it looks 
more simple. It appears on the whole to be more complicated 
because we learn about a greater experience-that is, we learn 
about more particles and new things-and so the laws look 
complicated again. But if you realize all the time what’s kind 
of wonderful-that is, if we expand our experience into wilder 
and wilder regions of experience-every once in a while we 
have these integrations when everything’s pulled together 
into a unification, in which it turns out to be simpler than it 
looked before. 

If you are interested in the ultimate character of the physi- 
cal world, or the complete world, and at the present time our 
only way to understand that is through a mathematical type 
of reasoning, then I don’t think a person can fully appreciate, 
or in fact can appreciate much of, these particular aspects of 
the world, the great depth of character of the universality of 
the laws, the relationships of things, without an understand- 
ing of mathematics. I don’t know any other way to do it, we 
don’t know any other way to describe it accurately . . . or to 
see the interrelationships without it. So I don’t think a person 
who hasn’t developed some mathematical sense is capable of 
fully appreciating this aspect of the world-don’t misunder- 
stand me, there are many, many aspects of the world that 
mathematics is unnecessary for, such as love, which are very 
delightful and wonderful to appreciate and to feel awed and 
mysterious about; and I don’t mean to say that the only thing 
in the world is physics, but you were talking about physics 
and if that’s what you’re talking about, then to not know 
mathematics is a severe limitation in understanding the 
world. 

The Pleasure of Finding Things Out 

Smashing Atoms 

Well, what I’m working on in physics right now is a special 
problem which we’ve come up against and I’ll describe what 
it is. You know that everything’s made out of atoms, we’ve 
got that far already and most people know that already, and 
that the atom has a nucleus with electrons going around. The 
behavior of the electrons on the outside is now completely 
[known], the laws for it are well understood as far as we can 
tell in this quantum electrodynamics that I told you about. 
And after that was evolved, then the problem was how does 
the nucleus work, how do the particles interact, how do they 
hold together? One of the by-products was to discover fission 
and to make the bomb. But investigating the forces that hold 
the nuclear particles together was a long task. At first it was 
thought that it was an exchange of some sort of particles in- 
side, which were invented by Yukawa, called pions, and it was 
predicted that if you hit protons-the proton is one of the par- 
ticles of the nucleus-against a nucleus, they would knock out 
such pions, and sure enough, such particles came out. 

Not only pions came out but other particles, and we began 
to run out of names-kaons and sigmas and lamdas and so 
on; they’re all called hadrons now-and as we increased the 
energy of the reaction and got more and more different kinds, 
until there were hundreds of different kinds of particles; then 
the problem, of course-this period is 1940 up to 1950, to- 
wards the present-was to find the pattern behind it. There 
seemed to be many many interesting relations and patterns 
among the particles, until a theory was evolved to explain 
these patterns, that all of these particles were really made of 
something else, that they were made of things called quarks- 
three quarks, for example, would form a proton-and that the 
proton is one of the particles of the nucleus; another one is a 

i 3 e Pleasure $Finding i3ings Out 

neutron. The quarks came in a number of varieties-in fact, at 
first only three were needed to explain all the hundreds of 
particles and the different kinds of quarks-they are called 
u-type, d-type, s-type. Two US and a d made a proton, two ds 
and a u made a neutron. If they were moving in a different 
way inside they were some other particle. Then the problem 
came: What exactly is the behavior of the quarks and what 
holds them together? And a theory was thought of which is 
very simple, a very close analogy to quantum electrodynam- 
ics-not exactly the same but very close-in which the quarks 
are like the electron and the particles called gluons-which go 
between the electrons, which makes them attract each other 
electrically-are like the photons. The mathematics was very 
similar but there are a few terms slightly different. The differ- 
ence in the form of the equations that were guessed at were 
guessed by principles of such beauty and simplicity that it 
isn’t arbitrary, it’s very, very determined. What is arbitrary is 
how many different kinds of quark there are, but not the 
character of the force between them. 

Now unlike electrodynamics, in which two electrons can be 
pulled apart as far as you want, in fact when they are very far 
away the force is weakened; if this were true for quarks you 
would have expected that when you hit things together hard 
enough the quarks would have come out. But instead of that, 
when you’re doing an experiment with enough energy that 
quarks could come out, instead of that you find a big jet-that 
is, all particles going about in the same direction as the old 
hadrons, no quarks-and from the theory, it was clear that 
what was required was that when the quark comes out, it kind 
of makes these new pairs of quarks and they come in little 
groups and make hadrons. 

The question is, why is it so different in electrodynamics, 
how do these small-term differences, these little terms that are 

The Pleasure of Finding Things Out 

different in the equation, produce such different effects, en- 
tirely different effects? In fact, it was very surprising to most 
people that this would really come out, that first you would 
think that the theory was wrong, but the more it’s studied the 
clearer it became that it’s very possible that these extra terms 
would produce these effects. Now we were in a position that’s 
different in history than any other time in physics, that’s al- 
ways different. We have a theory, a complete and definite the- 
ory of all of these hadrons, and we have an enormous num- 
ber of experiments and lots and lots of details, so why can’t 
we test the theory right away to find out whether it’s right or 
wrong? Because what we have to do is calculate the conse- 
quences of the theory. If this theory is right, what should hap- 
pen, and has that happened? Well, this time the difficulty is 
in the first step. If the theory is right, what should happen is 
very hard to figure out. The mathematics needed to figure out 
what the consequences of this theory are have turned out to 
be, at the present time, insuperably difficult. At the present 
time-all right? And therefore it’s obvious what my problem 
is-my problem is to try to develop a way of getting numbers 
out of this theory, to test it really carefully, not just qualita- 
tively, to see if it might give the right result. 

I spent a few years trying to invent mathematical things 
that would permit me to solve the equations, but I didn’t get 
anywhere, and then I decided that in order to do that I must 
first understand more or less how the answer probably looks. 
It’s hard to explain this very well, but I had to get a qualita- 
tive idea of how the phenomenon works before I courd get a 
good quantitative idea. In other words, people didn’t even 
understand roughly how it worked, and so I have been work- 
ing most recently in the last year or two on understanding 
roughly how it works, not quantitatively yet, with the hope 
that in the future that rough understanding can be refined 

l 3 e Pleasure OfFinding Dings Out 

into a precise mathematical tool, way, or algorithm to get 
from the theory to the particles. You see, we’re in a funny po- 
sition: It’s not that we’re looking for the theory, we’ve got the 
theory-a good, good candidate-but we’re in the step in the 
science that we need to compare the theory to experiment by 
seeing what the consequences are and checking it. We’re stuck 
in seeing what the consequences are, and it’s my aim, it’s my 
desire to see if I can work out a way to work out what the con- 
sequences of this theory are (LAUGHS). It’s a kind of a crazy 
position to be in, to have a theory that you can’t work out the 
consequences o f . . . I can’t stand it, I have to figure it out. 
Someday, maybe. 

“Let George Do It.“ 

To do high, real good physics work you do need absolutely 
solid lengths of time, so that when you’re putting ideas to- 
gether which are vague and hard to remember, it’s very 
much like building a house of cards and each of the cards 
is shaky, and if you forget one of them the whole thing col- 
lapses again. You don’t know how you got there and you 
have to build them up again, and if you’re interrupted and 
kind of forget half the idea of how the cards went together- 
your cards being different-type parts of the ideas, ideas of 
different kinds that have to go together to build up the 
idea-the main point is, you put the stuff together, it’s quite 
a tower and it’s easy [for it] to slip, it needs a lot of con- 
centration-that is, solid time to think-and if you’ve got a 
job in administrating anything like that, then you don’t 
have the solid time. So I have invented another myth for 
myself-that I’m irresponsible. I tell everybody, I don’t do 
anything. If anybody asks me to be on a committee to take 
care of admissions, no, I’m irresponsible, I don’t give a 

The Pleasure of Finding Things Out 

72e Pleasure OfFinding 72ings Out 

damn about the students-of course I give a damn about 
the students but I know that somebody else’ll do it-and I 
take the view, “Let George do it,” a view which you’re not 
supposed to take, okay, because that’s not right to do, but 
I do that because I like to do physics and I want to see if I 
can still do it, and so I’m selfish, okay? I want to do my 
physics. 

Bored by the History 

All those students are in the class: Now you ask me how 
should I best teach them? Should I teach them from the 
point of view of the history of science, from the applica- 
tions? My theory is that the best way to teach is to have no 
philosophy, [it] is to be chaotic and [to] confuse it in the 
sense that you use every possible way of doing it. That’s the 
only way I can see to answer it, so as to catch this guy or that 
guy on different hooks as you go along, [so] that during the 
time when the fellow who’s interested in history’s being 
bored by the abstract mathematics, on the other hand the 
fellow who likes the abstractions is being bored another time 
by the history-if you can do it so you don’t bore them all, 
all the time, perhaps you’re better off. I really don’t know 
how to do it. I don’t know how to answer this question of 
different kinds of minds with different kinds of interests- 
what hooks them on, what makes them interested, how you 
direct them to become interested. One way is by a kind of 
force, you have to pass this course, you have to take this ex- 
amination. It’s a very effective way. Many people go through 
schools that way and it may be a more effective way. I’m 

sorry, after many, many years of trying to teach and trying all 
different kinds of methods, I really don’t know how to do it. 

Like Father, Like Son 

I got a kick, when I was a boy, [out] of my father telling me 
things, so I tried to tell my son things that were interesting 
about the world. When he was very small we used to rock him 
to bed, you know, and tell him stories, and I’d make up a 
story about little people that were about so high [who] would 
walk along and they would go on picnics and so on and they 
lived in the ventilator; and they’d go through these woods 
which had great big long tall blue things like trees, but with- 
out leaves and only one stalk, and they had to walk between 
them and so on; and he’d gradually catch on [that] that was 
the rug, the nap of the rug, the blue rug, and he loved this 
game because I would describe all these things from an odd 
point of view and he liked to hear the stories and we got all 
kinds of wonderful things-he even went to a moist cave 
where the wind kept going in and out-it was coming in cool 
and went out warm and so on. It was inside the dog’s nose 
that they went, and then of course I could tell him all about 
physiology by this way and so on. He loved that and so 1,adld 
him lots of stuff, and I enjoyed it because I was telling him 
stuff that I liked, and we had fun when he would guess what 
it was and so on. And then I have a daughter and I tried the 
same thing-well, my daughter’s personality was different, she 
didn’t want to hear this story, she wanted the story that was 
in the book repeated again, and reread to her. She wanted me 
to read to her, not to make up stories, and it’s a different per- 
sonality. And so if I were to say a very good method for teach- 
ing children about science is to make up these stories of the 

The Pleasure of Finding Things Out 

f i e Pleasure of Finding fiings Out 

little people, it doesn’t work at all o n my daughter-it hap- 
pened to work on my son-okay? 

[wrong] and they’re intimidating people. I think so. I don’t 
know the world very well but that’s what I think. 

”Science Which Is Not a Science . . . ” 

Doubt and Uncertainty 

Because of the success of science, there is, I think, a kind of 
pseudoscience. Social science is an example of a science 
which is not a science; they don’t do [things] scientifically, 
they follow the forms-or you gather data, you do so-and-so 
and so forth but they don’t get any laws, they haven’t found 
out anything. They haven’t got anywhere yet-maybe some- 
day they will, but it’s not very well developed, but what hap- 
pens is on an even more mundane level. We get experts on 
everything that sound like they’re sort of scientific experts. 
They’re not scientific, they sit at a typewriter and they make 
up something like, oh, food grown with, er, fertilizer that’s or- 
ganic is better for you than food grown with fertilizer that’s 
inorganic-may be true, may not be true, but it hasn’t been 
demonstrated one way or the other. But they’ll sit there on 
the typewriter and make up all this stuff as if it’s science and 
then become an expert on foods, organic foods and so on. 
There’s all kinds of myths and pseudoscience all over the 
place. 

I may be quite wrong, maybe they do know all these things, 
but I don’t think I’m wrong. You see, I have the advantage of 
having found out how hard it is to get to really know some- 
thing, how careful you have to be about checking the experi- 
ments, how easy it is to make mistakes and fool yourself. I 
know what it means to know something, and therefore I see 
how they get their information and I can’t believe that they 
know it, they haven’t done the work necessary, haven’t done 
the checks necessary, haven’t done the care necessary. I have 
a great suspicion that they don’t know, that this stuff is 

If you expected science to give all the answers to the won- 
derful questions about what we are, where we’re going, what 
the meaning of the universe is and so on, then I think you 
could easily become disillusioned and then look for some 
mystic answer to these problems. How a scientist can take a 
mystic answer I don’t know because the whole spirit is to un- 
derstand-well, never mind that. Anyhow, I don’t understand 
that, but anyhow if you think of it, the way I think of what 
we’re doing is we’re exploring, we’re trying to find out as 
much as we can about the world. People say to me, “Are you 
looking for the ultimate laws of physics?” No, I’m not, I’m 
just looking to find out more about the world and if it turns 
out there is a simple ultimate law which explains everything, 
so be it, that would be very nice to discover. 

If it turns out it’s like an onion with millions of layers and 
we’re just sick and tired of looking at the layers, then that’s 
the way it is, but whatever way it comes out its nature is there 
and she’s going to come out the way she is, and therefore 
when we go to investigate it we shouldn’t predecide what it is 
we’re trying to do except to try to find out more about it. If 
you say your problem is, why do you find out more about it, 
if you thought you were trying to find out more about it be- 
cause you’re going to get an answer to some deep philosoph- 
ical question, you may be wrong. It may be that you can’t get 
an answer to that particular question by finding out more 
about the character of nature, but I don’t look at it [like that]. 
My interest in science is to simply find out about the world, 
and the more I find out the better it is, like, to find out. 

The Pleasure of Finding Things Out 

i’le Pleasure OfFinding i’lings Out 

know anything about, such as whether it means anything to 
ask why we’re here, and what the question might mean. I 
might think about it a little bit and if I can’t figure it out, then 
I go on to something else, but I don’t have to know an an- 
swer, I don’t feel frightened by not knowing things, by being 
lost in a mysterious universe without having any purpose, 
which is the way it really is so far as I can tell. It doesn’t 
frighten me. 

There are very remarkable mysteries about the fact that 
we’re able to do so many more things than apparently ani- 
mals can do, and other questions like that, but those are mys- 
teries I want to investigate without knowing the answer to 
them, and so altogether I can’t believe these special stories 
that have been made up about our relationship to the uni- 
verse at large because they seem to be too simple, too con- 
nected, too local, too provincial. The earth, He came to the 
earth, one of the aspects of God came to the earth, mind you, 
and look at what’s out there. It isn’t in proportion. Anyway, 
it’s no use arguing, I can’t argue it, I’m just trying to tell you 
why the scientific views that I have do have some effect on 
my belief. And also another thing has to do with the question 
of how you find out if something’s true, and if all the differ- 
ent religions have all different theories about the thing, then 
you begin to wonder. Once you start doubting, just like 
you’re supposed to doubt, you ask me if the science is true. 
You say no, we don’t know what’s true, we’re trying to find 
out and everything is possibly wrong. 

Start out understanding religion by saying everything is 
possibly wrong. Let us see. As soon as you do that, you start 
sliding down an edge which is hard to recover from and so 
on. With the scientific view, or my father’s view, that we 
should look to see what’s true and what may be or may not 
be true, once you start doubting, which I think to me is a very 
fundamental part of my soul, to doubt and to ask, and when 
you doubt and ask it gets a little harder to believe. 

You see, one thing is, I can live with doubt and uncertainty 
and not knowing. I think it’s much more interesting to live 
not knowing than to have answers which might be wrong. I 
have approximate answers and possible beliefs and different 
degrees of certainty about different things, but I’m not ab- 
solutely sure of anything and there are many things I don’t